The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Taleef Shereef, by Muhammad Sharif Khan

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: The Taleef Shereef
       Or, Indian Materia Medica

Author: Muhammad Sharif Khan

Translator: George Playfair

Release Date: December 18, 2016 [EBook #53755]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALEEF SHEREEF ***




Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This book was produced from scanned images of
public domain material from the Google Books project.)









                         TRANSCRIBER'S NOTICE

The medical knowledge represented in this book is several centuries
old. The publication of this book is for historical interest only,
and is not to be construed as medical advice by Project Gutenberg
or its volunteers. Medicinal plants should not be used without
consulting a trained medical professional. Medical science has made
considerable progress since this book was written. Recommendations
or prescriptions have been superseded by better alternatives, or
invalidated altogether. This book contains a number of prescriptions
that are very dangerous.




                                  THE

                            TALEEF SHEREEF,

                                   OR

                         INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA;

                     TRANSLATED FROM THE ORIGINAL.

                                   BY

                         GEORGE PLAYFAIR, Esq.

                SUPERINTENDING SURGEON, BENGAL SERVICE.



                              PUBLISHED BY

             The Medical and Physical Society of Calcutta.

                               Calcutta:

          PRINTED AT THE BAPTIST MISSION PRESS, CIRCULAR ROAD.
  SOLD BY MESSRS. THACKER & CO. CALCUTTA; & BY MESSRS. PARBURY, ALLEN
                                 & CO.
                                 1833.








TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.


In the course of a practice of upwards of twenty-six years in India,
I have often had occasion to regret, that I had no publication to
guide me, in my wish to become acquainted with the properties of
native medicines, which I had frequently seen, in the hands of the
Physicians of Hindoostan, productive of the most beneficial effects
in many diseases, for the cure of which our Pharmacopeia supplied no
adequate remedy; and the few which I had an opportunity of becoming
acquainted with, so far exceeded my expectations, that I determined
to make a Translation of the present work, for my own gratification
and future guidance.

Having finished the translation, I became convinced, that I should
not have fulfilled the whole of my duty if I did not make it public;
and ill calculated as I know myself for such an undertaking, I have
ventured to offer it to the world, with all its imperfections.

Conscious, that the liberal minded will give me credit for the best
of motives, I shall not dread criticism; and if it has the effect
of inducing those more competent to the task to an inquiry into
the properties of native medicines, my views will have been fully
accomplished.

In writing the names of the different medicines, I have followed the
Author's example, and have been guided solely by the pronunciation,
without altering the sound given to the letters in English, and have
not borrowed a single name from any work of Oriental literature. In
this I may have acted wrong, but I did so from the conviction, that by
this method, the names would be more familiar, and better understood,
by the Natives in researches after the different drugs.

I have inserted as many of the systematic names as I could trace,
both from Dr. Fleming's work, and those of others; but I regret,
that I was not honored in the acquaintance of any Botanist who could
have assisted me with more.

To the youth of the profession, I trust the work may be acceptable, by
leading them to the knowledge, that such medicines are in existence;
and my medical brethren of the higher grades may not deem further
inquiry into the properties of native drugs beneath their notice.

To the profession at large, then, I beg leave to dedicate this
Translation, with the hope, that they will make due allowance for
all faults, and that some of the more experienced will favor us with
another and better edition.

To my respected friends Messrs. Wilson and Twining, the profession is
indebted, that this little work ever saw light; and though they are
godfathers to none of its errors, yet without their encouragement and
aid, it must have slumbered in oblivion, and remained as was intended,
(after the failure of an attempt on the part of the translator,)
a manual for his own private use.








GLOSSARY.


Acouta,          Herpes.
Aruk,            Distilled liquid.
Boolbul,         Indian Nightingale.
Badgola,         Splenitis.
Coir,            Fibrous substance surrounding the Cocoanut.
Daad,            Impetigo.
Dhats,           Component parts of the human frame.
Elaous,          Disease of the Intestines. Introsusception.
Fetuck,          Hernia.
Goor,            Unrefined Sugar.
Juzam,           Black Leprosy.
Jow,             Barley.
Junglie Chuha,   The Forest Rat.
Khoonadeer,      Khoonazeer? Lupus, Cancer.
Kunzeer,         Cancer.
Mootiabin,       Total blindness, Gutta Serena.
Naringee,        The Orange.
Nachoona,        Opacity of the Cornea.
Neela Totha,     Sulphate of Copper.
Nuffsoodum,      Hæmoptysis.
Pilau, Poolau,   Dish made of meat and rice, seasoned with spices.
Peshanee,        The Forehead.
Paddy,           Rice in the husk.
Panroque,        Cold with Fever, also Jaundice.
Peendie,         A formula for females.
Paan,            A leaf, chewed by the Natives, with Catechu, Betel,
                 and Lime.
Raal,            Gum Resin.
Rajerogue,       Carbuncle.
Soonpat,         Loss of sensation in parts of the body.
Soorkhbad,       Erythema.








                          THE TALEEF SHEREEF,
                                   OR
                         INDIAN MATERIA MEDICA.

                            TRANSLATED FROM
                     THE ORIGINAL, WITH ADDITIONS.


1 Am, Ambe, Anbe.--The Fruit, Mangifera Indica.

The produce of a large tree very common in Hindostan. The fruit is
about the size of, and very much resembling in shape, a goat's kidney,
and having the external appearance of an apple. When ripe, it sometimes
retains the green color, but oftener becomes yellow, or red and yellow.

The virtues ascribed to this tree, are as follows:--The bruised
leaves and young shoots applied to the hair, expedite its growth,
and considerably darken its color.

The bark of the trunk of the tree, and of its roots, is cooling and
astringent; the former powerfully so. The leaves are astringent,
and promote digestion; their ashes styptic.

The young flowers are cool and drying; have a pleasant aromatic scent,
and when taken internally, are cooling and astringent; recommended
for the cure of chronic Gonorrhoea or Gleet, purulent expectoration,
bilious foulness of the blood and boils. The young unripe fruit has
much acidity, and is drying; moderately used, it increases all the
animal secretions, and is beneficial in chronic affections of the
liver; it promotes appetite, and is lithonthriptic. The fruit, when
ripe, is sweet, cooling, mucilaginous and heavy, tending to allay
thirst, and useful in nervous affections; strengthens the system,
restores impaired appetite, (is said to moderate an increased secretion
of bile,) and improves the complexion. The fruit is of various sizes,
from a few drachms to a pound weight; but it is usually met with
weighing about 4 ounces. It becomes acid about a month after the fall
of the flower, in which state it is used as preserves, such as jellies,
pickles, &c.; at this time, too, it is used as seasoning for Pilaus,
and other dishes; for when the stone or kernel has become hard, it
is no longer fit for these purposes. When the fruit has attained its
full growth, and when nearly ripe, it is to be taken from the tree,
and put into dry grass, straw, or the leaves of the Palass tree, and
there allowed to become ripe; this process deprives it of all acidity,
and also prevents the formation of a resinous gum, which it contracts
when allowed to ripen on the tree, and which renders it too pungent
to be eaten with relish.

The fruit is in perfection in the hot winds, and when the rains
commence, it ripens very fast; before the cold weather it is usually
out of season.

There are some trees that blossom the whole year, and some few that
even produce fruit; but instances of this are very rare.

There is a variety of this tree on which the fruit is sweet from its
first formation; this requires to be used early, otherwise it will
in all probability become a prey to insects.

Some trees produce fruit only once in 4 years. In general, it produces
fruit in abundance every second year, and less in the alternate year;
some are even perfectly barren every alternate year.

There is a mode of manuring this tree, which it is said improves
the flavour of the fruit greatly; this is mixing the juice of its
fruit with milk, and pouring it over the roots. It is also said to
be possible to communicate the flavor of any particular fruit to the
mangoe, by its expressed juice being made use of, as an application
to the roots of the tree.

The kernel of the mangoe, roasted, is pleasant to the taste, and
grateful to the stomach; it is much recommended in laxities of the
bowels, and strengthens the primæ viæ; water drank after having eat
of this kernel, seems to possess a flavor peculiarly excellent. The
usual mode of preparing them, is to allow them to remain exposed to
the rains, till the shell shall have become decayed; by this process
it is deprived of any heating or irritating property. Prepared in this
manner, and kept a short time in lime juice, taken out, bruised and
mixed with salt, fennel, &c, it is much extolled for strengthening
the stomach, and promoting digestion.

If preserved for 3 years, pounded, and swallowed to the quantity of a
tolah, with a little water, no medicine is preferable for strengthening
bowels habitually lax.

In the acid state, the fruit is very prejudicial to those who have
any disorders in their teeth, a cough, an affection of the chest, or
who are subject to cholicky pain in the bowels, but very beneficial
when used in irritable habits. The best method of using them is
this. The acid unripe fruit, after the outer rind has been peeled
off, is to be cut into thin slices, and infused for some hours in
water; this water so impregnated, is to be drained off, mixed with
a sufficient proportion of sugar, and used as sherbet. It produces a
great relish for food, and is in other respects beneficial. The same
effects are produced by the unripe fruit, being roasted and allowed to
remain in water, as above mentioned. It is recommended in paralysis,
from coup de vent. Many physicians have considered the mangoe to be
of a cooling nature, but, in my opinion, it is heating in all its
stages. The Yunani physicians have stated the ripe fruit to be hot
in the 2d, and dry in the 3d degree.

Its virtues may be described in a few words. It strengthens the
system, gives tone to the kidnies, restores impaired appetite, &c. It
is aperient, improves the complexion, beneficial in piles, an useful
deobstruent, braces and increases the bulk of the solids, and removes
nervous affections. In some of these disorders I am inclined to doubt
of its good effects, but such virtues are attributed to it. It is
recommended, in order to prevent any bad effects from the fruit in
its unripe state, that raisins be eaten with it. Hukeem Alwee Khan,
a man of eminence in his profession in the reign of Mahommed Shah,
says, that if ever this fruit disagreed with the system, it must have
been eaten when unripe or green.

I had occasion to attend a gentleman of very high rank, who laboured
under dropsy; I cured him of the disease, but 3 years afterwards,
having eaten a large quantity of mangoes, the disease returned,
and I have observed the same effects in other cases.

Hukeem Alli Mughphoor, physician, states, that influenced by the
resemblance of the mangoe to the human kidney, he concluded that
it must be beneficial in that organ, (disorders of;) he therefore
prescribed it in a case of hectic fever, arising from diseased kidney,
and completely cured the disease. In this I differ from him entirely;
he must have mistaken the nature of the complaint, for a remedy given
expressly for the cure of a disease in the kidney, could not, at the
same time, have removed the fever, excepting appropriate medicines
had been administered along with it!!

The best mangoes are those having a thin juice, sweet and free from
fibres; and they ought to be cooled in water or in ice, especially
during the hot weather. It is preferable to use the juice of the fruit
without eating any of the fibrous parts; a neglect of this may produce
various disorders, such as indigestion, cholicky pains, &c. It is very
common to eat the expressed juice, mixed with sugar and other things,
with rice, or with bread, but this is great imprudence; for in the
most healthy subjects it may produce nausea, and general uneasiness.

Should any ill effects follow the use of the mangoe, milk, or the
kernel of the fruit, will be found a corrector. My father's opinion
is, that these are not the only remedies; for if it produces any
heating effect, curdled milk will give relief, or even cold water,
or acidulated sherbet, and he himself was always in the habit of
using the Phalsa sherbet on these occasions.

Should cholic be produced, the Oil of Almonds or other sweet oils,
will remove the complaint; and a diarrhoea is to be cured by the use of
the kernel; and a swelling of the abdomen, by milk, in which a little
ginger has been mixed; or even ginger by itself will have the effect

A substitute for mangoe, as a medicine, may be had in Chobe Cheenee.

In general, it will be adviseable to abstain from the use of the
mangoe, till 2 or 3 showers of rain have fallen; but those of a
cold phlegmatic or melancholic temperament do not require to be
so particular.

Those for whose complaints mangoes have been recommended, have in a
few months derived great benefit from their use, by eating them with
camel's milk. There are many kinds of this fruit, and their names
are as various; but the stronger the scent, the more effectual they
are as a medicine. In Persian it is called Nugzuck.

2 Aramsheetul.--Pungent and cooling; useful in bilious and catarrhal
complaints; also recommended in foulness of the blood.

3 Akaholie.--Vermifuge, also recommended in bilious and catarrhal
disorders, in seminal weakness and gonorrhoea.

4 Adki.--Vide Arhir.

5 Anula. (nasal N.)--Or Amle, (Phyllanthus emblica, W. Murray IV. 127,
Myrobolans.) The fruit round, like a plum. The tree like that of the
tamarind, of a pleasant acid, and sweetish astringent taste. It is
aperient, cooling, and drying; of great use in eruptions of the skin,
arising from a redundance of bile. Other virtues ascribed to this
fruit may be found in all Yunani works. It is also called Bidjee and
Dhatri Phill, used by the natives for cleansing the hair.

6 Aru.--A variety of plum, much resembling the common sort, both in
the tree and fruit; it however possesses more acidity, and is less
easy of digestion.

7 Abi.--Pyrus Cidonia. The Quince; slightly astringent, and cool in
a great degree; heavy and difficult of digestion, yet it is gently
laxative and expectorant, and is recommended for strengthening the
powers of virility. In Arabic Siffirjill, Persian Behi.

8 Aak.--Arug, Mudar, Asclepias gigantea. A milky shrub, very common
all over India; its pod resembles a mangoe, but rather longer in
proportion: when ripe it breaks, and is found filled with a white
substance, resembling silk, to which the seeds are fixed. The leaves
of the plant resemble the Dak, but are somewhat smaller: its height is
generally from 1 to 1 1/2 yard; when its leaves or stalk are broken,
a white milky liquid exudes. There are two kinds, white and red;
both are purgatives, violently so. It is said to be beneficial in
the following disorders. Foulness of the blood, bilious affections,
Juzam, Psora, Zærbad, boils, cuticular eruptions, diseases of the
liver, visceral obstructions, hæmorrhoids, all internal diseases,
dropsy and worms.

("Many and wonderful virtues are ascribed to this plant; but I must
refer those who have faith in charms to the original Taleef Shereef,
when their curiosity will be amply gratified." Translator.)

All the above virtues have been ascribed to this plant; my opinion
is, that the application of the leaves is useful in swellings,
promotes suppuration in indolent tumors, and cures eruptions on the
skin. The milk blisters, and if applied to the eye, it produces
swelling, itchiness, and loss of vision. The powder of the root,
mixed with goat's blood and fresh butter, and applied to the eye,
is said materially to strengthen vision. In other works it is said,
that the milk of every variety of this plant is poisonous, and
violently cathartic.

9 Aal.--Vide Mujeet, Rubia, Madder, a wood used for dyeing a red
color, and forming a principal article of commerce in some parts of
India. In the "Dhara Shakoi" it is called Mujeet, but I suspect that
they are different plants, as the Mujeet is thin, and of a fine red
color; whereas the Aal is blackish, with a tinge of yellow, though
not thicker than the other.

10 Aditt Bagut.--In Persian, Aftab Perust, Helianthus Annuus. The
sun-flower; the name of a flower called also Soorujmookee. The
stem grows straight about a man's height; the leaves are broad and
triangular, the flower circular, flat and yellow, with serrated edges,
and it is said to follow the sun in his diurnal progress. There are
two kinds, a small and greater; their medical properties the same;
they are bitter to the taste, and heating in a considerable degree. It
is beneficial in cholicks, dropsical affections, foulness of stomach,
and rheumatism; it also improves appetite, and promotes expectoration
in cases of cold, accompanied by fever.

11 Area.--A culinary fruit resembling the cucumber, and grows in
the rainy season; it is so cooling that it produces pains all over
the body; it is moreover difficult of digestion, and if taken in any
quantity produces fever.

12 Anwul (Nasal).--A large tree very common in India, which when
in flower, has a very beautiful appearance; its flowers are yellow,
resembling those of the Cassia. There are two kinds of this, one called
Mahedi Anwul. Of this also there are two varieties. It is cooling, and
the medicinal properties of all varieties are the same. It is used with
good effect in bilious vomitings, and also in leprous affections of the
skin. It is recommended in weakness of the eyes, asthma, affections
of the chest, and foulness of blood. It strengthens the weak and
emaciated, and braces the solids when relaxed by disease or otherwise.

13 Aruk.--This name is indiscriminately given to four different kinds
of trees; Nowa, Cutel, Burhil and Taar.

14 Aloo (Bochara).--A kind of plum.

15 Abnoos (Ebony).--A large tree, producing a sweet fruit like
grapes. Its leaves resemble those of the Sinobir, but are somewhat
broader: it is an evergreen, and its wood is, when good and full-grown,
dark-colored and durable; its leaves are smooth and glassy; its
properties said to be very active and deleterious; it is heating in
a considerable degree, and is said to be lithonthriptic. It dispels
flatulency, and cures tympanites. It is recommended in chronic
affections of the liver. Filings or raspings of the wood are styptic,
and its charcoal more so; a decoction of the wood, in spirits, is very
effectual in discussing scrophulous tumours, when externally applied.

The raspings of the wood, mixed with whites of eggs, is an excellent
application to scalds and burns; they are also famed for cleaning
deep foul ulcers, and inducing the growth of healthy granulation.

Taken internally, the dose is 10 1/2 Mashas, and should it disagree
with the stomach, which it often does, honey, or Gum Arabic, with
sweet basil, are correctors. The large Baer Tree, (Konar), is a good
substitute for the Abnoos; quality, hot 3, dry 2. Persian Awnoos.

16 Anbihildee.--Curcuma zedoaria, (Rox.) Amomum Zed. Wildenow. An
Indian root, hot and dry in the 2d degree; useful in herpes, and
foulness of the blood, and much esteemed as an external application
in wounds and bruises, for which it is also internally exhibited:
orange juice used as a vehicle, corrects, in some degree, its heating
quality; or if this be not procurable, Bapahic, or the seed of the
Penwur, or Turmeric, will have the same effect; the medicine may be
given to the quantity of 3 1/2 Masha.

17 Apurjeeta.--Clitoria ternatea, Crow's beak, a twining shrub. The
natives call it Kowwa Thontee, which literally signifies crow's
beak, also Neelisbund; the plant is about a foot and a half high,
and sometimes less, resembling the Cungheiy, only the leaves of the
latter are smooth and polished, while those of the former are rough and
hard; both the Apurjeeta and the variety Neelisbund, are cooling. It is
beneficial in weakness of sight, in clearing the voice and soreness of
the throat, and is useful in the poisonous bites of leeches. It is also
of use in rheumatic affections of the joints, Juzam, bilious disorders,
mucous discharge from the lungs or bowels; it allays general heat,
and is said to be an antidote to certain poisonous substances, and
of great efficacy in hard indolent tumours, and affections of the skin.

18 Abruc.--Talc, A fossil substance, beneficial in seminal weakness,
redundance of bile, mucus, &c. An antidote to poison. The physicians
of Hindostan prepare it for use by calcination. Arabic, Tulk.

19 Abhea.--A name for Hurr; it also signifies the water of life,
and a medicine called Guloe.

20 Aotungun.--A very common seed, resembling coriander. In powder
it is recommended as giving strength to the system, and rendering
Aphrodisie more permanent. It is a very favorite medicine in India. It
is, moreover, useful in Nephritia and liver complaints, and it is very
innocent in its operation. Some physicians describe it as hot and dry,
in a considerable degree, and disagreeing with the stomach; they,
therefore, recommend it to be taken with a proportion of sugar. In
all its properties the Maadentezerrubad states the Bonphilly to be
nearly the same; dose 4 1/4 Mashas.

21 Atees.--The root. Of this there are two kinds, a white and black,
and both are very common. The white kind resembles the Jedwaar; the
root is very irregular in thickness. It frequently is found resembling
the white Bahmen. Both kinds are bitter, astringent, pungent, and
heating; aiding digestion, useful in dysentery, vomiting, and piles.

22 Adjmode.--Bishop's Weed, Sisson Ammi, (Linn.) Amoos, (Arab.) Ajooan,
(Hind.) Nemkha, P. Ajamodum, S. A hot seed, stomachic cordial and
stimulant. (Ajmood, Parsley? Taylor. Apium Involucratum.) Apium
Involucratum, Rox. M. S. "Sp. Ch. Annual, glaucous, villous, superior
leaflets filiform, both general and partial, involucra, about 6
leaved." Bitter and pungent, light and heating, increases appetite,
induces costiveness, and strengthens the vital energy; increases
the seminal secretion, and removes pains and other disorders,
the consequence of colds; beneficial in nausea, is vermifuge,
relieves hiccup, and is useful in Dysuria, but it produces heat in
the abdomen. It is called Curufs, but it is only a variety of this,
and is something betwixt that and Aniseed, though this may be owing
to the difference of cultivation.

23 Adjwain.--"Anise Seed. In Arabic, Aneesoon. Pimpinella Anisum, Linn.

"Ujwain. The seed of a plant of the Dill kind, Taylor. Ligusticum
Adjwaen, Roxb. Sp. Ch. annual, erect, leaves super de compound,
with filiform leaflets, ridges and furrows of the seeds distinct
and scabrous. This is what is recommended to notice by Dr. Percival,
under the name Ajava seed."

A species of the above, of which there are two kinds, one of which is
called Juhar; both are bitter, pungent, and aromatic; it resembles the
Ajmode, but is smaller, and has a strong aromatic scent. It assists
digestion, improves appetite, is useful in rheumatism and catarrhal
affections; is vermifuge, beneficial in dropsy, dispels flatulence,
and is highly extolled in flatulent cholic. A. Nanchoa.


24 Adjwain. 25 Khorasanee. "Hyosciamus niger, Linn. Black
Henbane. Narcotic. Corrector, Vinegar."

This plant grows thick from the root, and is covered with a hairy
down. The seeds are contained within a hard thick shell, and the
leaves are like those of the pomegranate flower. The pod is filled
with seeds of a small irregular shape. There is a plant called Hulbeh,
which resembles this, but is smaller. A. Buzurulbunje.

26 Adjan.--Or Adjain, a large tree, with wide spreading branches,
in size approaching that of the mangoe; its leaves growing close,
and also resembling those of the mangoe tree, but longer and thinner;
the fruit is about 1 1/2 foot long, and very thin.

27 Akhroat.--"The Walnut, Juglans regia, Linn." This is a native
of hilly countries; its leaves are like the Terpat; the fruit is
sweet to the taste, heating, and heavy; it loosens the bowels, and
restores strength; it is useful in rheumatic affections, increases
mental energy and the powers of manhood, and gives relief in flying
pains in the stomach. A. Jouz.

28 Andaluck.--A kind of grain.

29 Aderuck.--"Ginger, Amomum zinziber, Linn. Amomum zinziber,
Wild. Adraca, S. Sonth (dried root,) H. Sunthi, S." A very common root,
the stem of which is knotty, and from every knot, a leaf is produced;
it is hot and heavy; promotes digestion if eaten before meals, mixed
with Lahore salt, (rock salt;) it prevents flatulent swellings in
the stomach and bowels. P. Zinzibeel tur. It is much extolled as a
stomachic when prepared as sweetmeats; but if the syrup be allowed to
dry, it spoils, becomes less grateful to the taste, and its heating
quality is much increased.

30 Arnee.--The name of a tree, in height that of the Peach tree, but
it is full of branches from the root upwards, and the leaves are like
those of the Sumhaloo; it is heating, and beneficial in rheumatic
complaints and swellings from cold. In the Dhintri it is described
as oleaginous and heavy; effectual in Jaundice, increasing appetite,
loosening the bowels, and removing flatulence.

31 Arhir or Toor.--"Cytisus cajan." Some consider these as distinct
species, but in my opinion Toor is only Arhir in an overgrown
state. The plant grows to the height of a yard and half; and the
taste of the pea of the Arhir is preferable to that of the Toor. Toor
is sown and cut down at the same time as the sugar-cane; whereas the
Arhir is sown, and cut with the barley. The pod of the Toor is larger
than that of the Arhir; and the former has an unpleasant smell, which
is wanting in the latter; they are both used very commonly as food,
all over India. It is in its properties cool and dry, and produces
costiveness; it is useful in bilious and catarrhal disorders,
and in foulness of the blood. It is even said to be an antidote
to poisons. In its taste it is sweet, like that of the Cassela. I
conceive it hot in the 2d, and dry in the 3d degree, and recommend it
for strengthening the stomach. When used as food it is heavy; but is
beneficial in complaints having their origin in cold. If twice scalded
in hot water, before it is boiled, it will cause less thirst; and if
boiled in milk, or whey, it becomes less heating. A decoction of the
leaves is recommended as a wash for the mouth, in cases of toothache,
and diseases of the teeth. P. Shakool.

32 Aord, or Aort, or Mash..--vide M. (Phaseolus Max.)

33 Arne'.--The wild buffaloe. Its flesh recommended in
Marasmus. P. Gowmeche Serhaie.

34 Arnd.--"The Castor, Ricinus communis, W. Palma Christi." Wildenow
says, "Planta semper annua, nunquam fructicosa vel arborea, nec in
calidissimis terræ plagis liguescit." But this is incorrect; for the
plant is perennial, and becomes a moderate sized tree. The natives,
however, have a prejudice against allowing it to grow beyond 3 or
4 years, and even this is only in solitary places. The chief reason
I fancy is, that it interferes with the cultivation of the soil, if
permitted to remain. They usually sow it with grain, and reap the grain
crop before it has attained its full height; this they can do annually,
but seed sown under its shelter the second year, would not succeed.

A shrub, with broad soft leaves, like the fig tree; it grows about 6
or 8 feet in height; the root is hollow, and without flaw or wrinkle;
the seed grows in bunches like grapes, and the shell of the pod,
which resembles gall-nuts, is covered with soft prickles. The seed is
like the coffee bean, and is stained with different colored spots,
so as to appear like marbled paper; the kernel is white, soft, and
oleaginous. There are two kinds of this; one with a red, the other
with a green pod; the former is culled Jongia Arnde; both varieties
are sweet, heating, and heavy. The oil of the kernel is useful in
removing obstinate constrictions of the intestines, when given warm;
also in flatulency; rheumatic swellings of the joints and lumbago;
in strangury, spasms in the urinary bladder, headaches, dropsy, and
feverish complaints. It is also recommended as an expectorant in
difficulty of breathing, and in cough; in affections of the skin,
and in superabundance of mucus in the intestines. It is a warm,
stimulating purgative; the dose one or two table spoonsful. Both
my father, uncle, and I, have used it with great success, in cases
of obstinate cholic from costiveness. They also used the leaves
moistened with ghee, as an external application in rheumatic pains
and swellings. If the seeds are bruised, and mixed with curdled milk,
and allowed to remain in this state till they become putrid, they form
an excellent application for the cure of itch, and usually succeed
in 7 or 8 days. It has also been said, that if one of the kernels
be taken at first, and daily increased by one, till 100 are taken,
and then decreased in the same gradual manner, it will cure Juzam,
and other kinds of Leprosy.

35 Arusa.--A name for the Baan Tree; vide Bansa. In the
Maadentezerrubad, it is thus described:--Arusa is a medicine of
Hindoostan, hot and moist, or in the opinion of some writers,
cool and moist, in the 2d degree: half an ounce of the juice,
with as much honey, is a cure for hoarseness, or loss of voice;
and used with the fruit of the Peepul tree, it increases appetite,
and corrects mucous discharges. A decoction of the leaves in water,
is useful in Jaundice, difficulty of breathing, Gonorrhoea, and hectic
fever. As a gargle it strengthens the gums; and the leaves bruised,
and taken in honey or water, cure Epistaxis, Hoematemesis, Nausea,
Vertigo, and Suppression of the menses.

36 Arjun.--A tree, also the fruit; hot and astringent; useful in
bilious affections, and in prostration of strength from fatigue, and an
antidote to poisons. Its use is interdicted in disorders arising from
cold; also in ulcers: but externally applied it cleanseth foul sores,
and promotes healthy granulation. It prolongs Aphrodisia, strengthens
the system, and expedites the union of divided parts. Some physicians
call it cooling. Pentaptera Arjuna.

37 Arloo, Catoombura, or Sheunag,.--The name of a tree, a native
of the hills; it is pungent, beneficial in loosening phlegm, and
promoting appetite; it produces costiveness, and is vermifuge, and
recommended in Juzam. It is an ingredient in the Dusmool.

38 Arvie, or Arum Colocasia,.--A root and seed. It is about 3 inches
long, more or less, and when the outer rind is removed it is white. Its
stem is about 3 feet in height; its leaves large like a shield,
with the points reflected; in consistence and polish it is like
the plaintain leaf. It is also called Cutchaloo, but the different
names are only applied with propriety to different parts of the same
root; the Cutchaloo being more like a Byngun or Egg-plant. They are
both in general use in India. The Arvie is dressed with meat, and
the Cutchaloo is roasted; the leaves and shoots are also commonly
eaten. Its properties, I can declare from experience, are in a small
degree cool; and it is useful in giving strength to the system;
prevents the involuntary emission of semen; it produces wind, and is
heavy and hurtful to the throat Its corrector is acids, and being
repeatedly washed in water. The Cutchaloo is the most powerful,
and the most hurtful of the two kinds. A. Culdass, at least it is
so stated; but in the Yunani works, there is a material difference;
as the Culdass is described, therefore, it is doubtful to me whether
they are one and the same.

39 Armeede,.--A kind of cucumber.

40 Aorde Gunta.--A kind of Satawur.

41 Aistullkund.--The name of a root; also called Giràmkund; also a
variety of the medicine Maankund: it promotes phlegm, and corrects
bile and wind; it is also useful in foulness of the blood and general
swellings. The other kind is useful in foulness of blood, and in
bilious affections; it is sweet, cool, and heavy. It is likewise
called Istolékund.

42 Asperuck.--A name for Akléel ul Mulk.

43 Asgund.--Physalis flexuosa. A very common white root, also
called Asgund'h, about half a yard long, like the sweet potatoe,
(Convolvulus batatas.) When thin and dry, it resembles the Shúkákul
mysrie, (carrot;) its leaves are very like those of the kuth, (Mimosa
catechu,) but rather less. It grows about a yard along the ground; its
taste is astringent and bitter; it is hot, and strengthens the powers
of virility; removes bilious and mucous affections; is beneficial in
general swellings, and white leprosy.

Some give this name to the Kaknej, or Winter Cherry. In the
Maadentezerrubad, it is thus described. Asgund is a medicine of
Hindoostan; the best sort of which is procurable at Nagour. It is hot
and dry in the 1st degree. The people of India use in its stead, the
Soorinjan, (the Hermodactylus.) It is especially beneficial in pains of
the joints. The root, when arrived at perfection, has a strong scent of
the horse; from which circumstance it has in India, derived its name;
Asp, signifying the horse, and Gund, smell: it is also called Bajecund.

If 3 drachms of the root be boiled in 2 pounds of cow's milk, and 1
ounce of sugar mixed with it, and this taken for 14 days, it increases
peculiar secretions, and improves the complexion.

44 Asphill.--Padmunie, a variety of Kunwul. The Lotus, (Nymphæa
Nelumbo,) which is produced on dry land. It is sweet, bitterish,
and cool; is useful in vomiting, Diarrhoea, and foulness of the blood.

45 Astull.--Buntàki, a name for Buratha; it means a large Byngun,
or Egg-fruit; the plant being the same.

46 Aspurka.--Cool and light; promotes peculiar secretions, and
is useful in various disorders: it removes offensive exhalations;
moderates profuse sweats; is beneficial in dropsy; restores strength;
cures emaciation; and is an antidote to poisons.

47 Aoshire.--Kuss kuss. Ooseer? Andropogon muricatum, Koenig. A
name for Kuss kuss. In the Dara Shekoi, it is called Aosire, and is
described as the root of the grass kuss, with which houses are made
cool in the hot weather. It is cool, and assists digestion, cures
laxity of the bowels, and is useful in bilious affections, foulness
of blood, and superabundance of mucus; allays thirst, is a grateful
application to blistered parts, or where much heat is experienced;
beneficial in difficulty of voiding urine, in boils and eruptions,
and prolongs aphrodisia.

48 Asteghoon.--An article of food, made by mixing one part of Moong,
with two parts of rice, boiling them together, and pouring off the
water, with which is to be mixed rock salt, assafoetida, coriander,
ginger, and peepul. This is an excellent drink in fevers, in bilious
affections, and foulness of the blood; it increases appetite, and
clears, and gives tone to the kidnies and bladder.

49 Apheem.--(Papaver somniferum.) Of this there are four kinds;
the 1st, which is white, is called Chaarun, (promoting digestion;)
the 2d, Maarun, is black; the 3d yellow, and the 4th, of all these
colours mixed, called Saarun. Its properties are well known, and
fully detailed in all Yunani works on medicine.

50 Aginmunt.--Agwunt. Names of Arnee; q. vide.

51 Agust.--(Æschynomene Grandiflora.) A tree, cool and dry, producing
flatulence, curing bile, foulness of blood, and mucus; also fever. Its
flowers beneficial in improving the sense of smelling, and in night
blindness.

52 Akroat.--Vide Akhroat.

53 Akirkirra.--or Akirkirrhà, (Dranculus.) In Yunani works called
discutient and alternant.

"Anthemis Pyrethrum, Linn. Pelletory of Spain, Ainslie. Off. The
Root. Pyrethre, (F.) Eaher Wustrell, (G.) Akkárácárum, (Tam.) Powerful
stimulant, useful as a sialagogue, to excite an increased flow of
saliva; hence useful in headache, rheumatism of the face, toothache,
in paralysis of the tongue and muscles of the throat."

54 Agur.--Dry and light, useful in affections of the eyes; it also
promotes the secretion of bile. A. Oodh.

55 Agunie Char.--Pungent and very hot. In rheumatic affections of
the chest, Soonpat from mucus, and rheumatic pains in the joints,
it is highly beneficial. This medicine is the produce of the western
provinces of India; and the best kind is red, and feels hot to the
touch; it is found by the sides of rivers.

56 Akasbele.--Cuscuta reflexa, a name for Afteemoon, (Dodder of Thyme.)

57 Alsi.--"Linum Usitatissimum, W. Atasi, S. Tesi, H. Emollient
and demulcent." Grows about 1 1/2 foot high; its leaves are
thin, and its flower of the color of Lapis lazuli. In India it is
supposed to decrease the secretion of semen, and to weaken sight;
it is hot, and said to be discutient; it is useful in phlegm from
cold. A. Buzzúrkatan.

58 Aoloo.--The owl. Those who eat its flesh may expect to be deprived
of all reasoning faculties, with loss of memory. It produces much wind,
and is called in Persian, Boom.

The women of India frequently give it to their husbands, that by the
mental weakness it produces, they may obtain more liberty of conduct
than might otherwise be agreeable.

59 Alaechee.--A. Kakla. "Amomum Cardamomum, Wild. Amomum Repens,
Wood, vol. II. p. 356." It is of two kinds, and very common. The
tree is very large, its leaves resemble those of the sugar cane, of
the length of a man; it is very fragrant, and both kinds are nearly
alike in properties. The physicians of India call it moderately cool,
aromatic, and bitter; and that it is useful in bilious affections,
rheumatic complaints, and superabundance of mucus; it is likewise
said to decrease Aphrodisia, and to be prejudicial in affections of
the chest The large kind possesses all these properties in a greater
degree than the small; "the latter is called the Guzerattee Alaechee."

60 Alta.--A name for the Lac colour.

61 Amulbedh.--Called also Amulbenth, a very acid fruit of India;
the tree much resembles the lime tree, but is rather larger. It is so
very acid, that it will, in a few minutes, dissolve a needle, or small
shell. It is light and aperient; improves decayed appetite; is cardiac;
removes visceral obstructions, and increases all the secretions. I
have been accustomed to take out part of the pulp of the fruit,
and to fill the empty space with such medicines as assist digestion,
and correct disorders of the digestive organs, in a pounded state,
and allowing the fruit, thus medicated, to dry, and using it under
the title of Amulbedh. It is brought in quantities from Jeynugger,
and Ruttunboil. A spurious sort of this is made from the large lemon,
and sold in its stead. I have found it useful in promoting digestion,
giving relief in rheumatism, and as an aperient (Amul means acid.)

62 Amulchangerie.--An acid fruit, from a plant of India, called
Changerie, much resembling the In-ubassaleb, (Nightshade,) and grows
about 8 inches high, or more, and is about as much expanded. Its
properties are hot, light, and stomachic; it promotes digestion, and
is beneficial in Piles and Juzam; it cures laxities of the bowels,
and decreases all the secretions, except bile.

63 Amlie.--Tamarindus Indicus. A large tree; the fruit and leaves off
it are very small, growing from both sides of a centre stem; they close
up at night, and are expanded during the day. The fruit resembles a
bean-pod, bent in the centre, and usually less than 8 inches in length;
it bends so as to assume the figure of a semi-circle, but often not so
much. The Author of the Book Tophut-ul-Momeneen, describes the tree as
resembling the Pomegranate tree; but I suspect he had never seen it. It
is acid and heavy, removes flatulence, but increases bile and blood.

When ripe, it is laxative, promotes appetite, and is beneficial
in oppression after meals. It is dry, light, cardiac, and restores
prostration of strength from fatigue. It removes nausea, giddiness,
thirst, and general heat. Sherbet prepared from it, should it agree
with the stomach, is preferable to any other, and prevents the noxious
influence of the hot winds on the system. The kind which is red, ought
to be chosen for preserves, and it possesses all the properties of
the fresh fruit. The flowers of the tamarind eat with meat, increase
its flavor; they also prevent accumulation of bile, are aperient,
and increase appetite; but they are improper when acidity prevails
in the stomach.

64 Amrutphull.--A name given to the sweet lime. Vide Rajeneemb.

65 Ambarae.--A fruit, the produce of the hills, large and acid.

66 Amarbele.--A name for Afteemoon (Dodder Thyme.)

67 Amroude.--(Guava.) An Indian fruit resembling the pear. It is full
of small seeds, and is of an unpleasant smell; its tree resembles the
mulberry, but is smaller; the leaves are like the leaf of the mangoe,
green, with a tinge of red, and the veins of the leaf are strongly
marked. The fruit is pendant, and its shape pyramidal. It is also
called Suffryam, "Psidium pyriferum." It strengthens the stomach,
produces costiveness, and is astringent. I have given it with good
effect in laxities of the bowels.

68 Amratuck.--The name of a culinary vegetable.

69 Amultas.--Called also Kurwara. "Cassia Fistula, W. Sauvernaca,
S. Casse, F. Rohnkassie, G. The pulp of its fruit laxative." Its
flowers are dressed, and eaten with meat; and it has the virtue of
giving it additional flavor, and loosening the bowels.

70 Ananass.--Called also Kutel Sufrie, (The Pineapple,) for this
reason, that if the plant is carried along with a person proceeding on
a journey, it will produce fruit. It is about the size of the large
lime, called Turunje; its color yellow, tinged with red; its surface
is irregular, and covered with small prickles; its smell like that of
the mangoe, and very pleasant; the whole plant, including the fruit,
is about a yard in height; the leaves have serrated edges, and the
fruit grows perpendicular. On the top of the stem there is a bunch
of leaves growing from the top of the fruit, which if broken off,
and planted, is reproductive. It bears fruit only once, and only one
fruit at a time. I have not seen its properties noticed in any work,
but the people of India call it cooling. It was first described by
Abul Fuzul, in the Ayen Akberry; and this was afterwards copied by the
Author of the Dhara Shekoih, from which others have copied it. Part
of this description I have copied, and from my own observation have
added the remainder. In my opinion it is hot in a small degree, and
moist in the 2d degree. Its use is grateful to the system, and it gives
strength to the intellectual powers, also tone to the stomach. It is
injurious to the throat, to the solids, to respiration, and to the
intestines; but its corrector is sugar, and if it be sliced, put in
rose water to which sugar is added, and allowed to stand for some time,
its beneficial properties are increased, while its injurious qualities
are prevented or corrected. A preserve made from it, is excellent, and
is used with stews and Pilau, as giving them great additional relish.

72 Ambeloona.--A fruit of Hindoostan, acid and astringent, cool and
producing costiveness, beneficial in mucus and bile; also in carbuncle,
and other tumors and affections of the throat.

73 Ambegool or Angool, or Ambegooda; called also Inderain Soorkh. (Vide
the next article.) A plant whose taste is bitter and astringent;
it is hot and moist, light and purgative, beneficial in flatulence,
mucus, and general swellings. It is vermifuge, and removes pains
in the bowels. It is an antidote to poisons, and removes disorders
produced by indigestion. The fruit of the plant is sweet and cool,
heavy and purgative, useful in affections from wind, bile, and
disorders of the blood; it removes general heat, and is beneficial in
Marasmus. It decreases the seminal secretion, increases mucus, and
strengthens the system. Nourdi Mahommed says, that in the epidemic
carbuncle which affects the armpit or throat, this fruit is given
with more success than any other medicine; and that one fruit given
internally, and another applied to the part, will cure the disease,
should there be any stamina remaining in the system. He also says,
that if ten pounds of this fruit be steeped for a week in Anula
water, taken out and dried, put into a mill, and the oil expressed,
and this oil introduced into the nose for 8 days successively, white
hair will become black. He writes much more respecting its virtues;
but as I have had no experience of them, and cannot vouch for the
effect, I forbear to transcribe them.

74 Inderain.--"Cucumis Colocynthus. Wild Gourd. Bitter cucumber. It is
said by Thunberg to be rendered so perfectly mild, by being pickled,
as to be used as food at the Cape of Good Hope." The fruit of a plant
like the small melon, and very bitter; the plant too resembles that
of the melon, and in Persian it is called the bitter melon. There
are two kinds of this, one I have already described under the head
of the preceding article. Both are bitter, powerful, hot, light, and
purgative; a cure for Jaundice, useful in bilious and mucous affection,
diseases of the spleen, dropsy and fever: they are also vermifuge.

In menstrual suppression the following is said to be effectual.

Of the root of Inderain Soorkh 1 pice weight, pepper 14 grains in
number; bruise, and give in water: effectual in two or three days.

Also the following is used by the natives; bitter Toombric seed,
Jawakhar, Goor, Mynphill, in equal parts, mixed with the milk of the
prickly pear, and formed into a tent; applied to the Os Uteri for 3
days, it will produce fever.

75 Anderjow.--"Nerium Anti-dysentericum, Echites Anti-dysenterica,
(Roxb. MS.) Curaya, H. Cutaja, S." A large tree, with leaves like the
almond tree; it produces a fruit long and broad, which grow separate
from each other. The fruit contains a number of seeds, rather longer
than those of the melon, and resembling a bird's tongue. The pulp
of the fruit is of a yellowish white, but the seeds are red. Its
properties are bitter, pungent, cool, and astringent. It cures
flatulence, bile, and fever, is vermifuge, and is useful in piles,
and beneficial in that kind of carbuncle the matter of which is
infectious: there are two kinds of this, a bitter and a sweet sort:
of these, the bitter is to be preferred. In Hemorrhoids, where much
blood is discharged, if taken in the quantity of half a tolah daily,
in cold water, for eight days, the cure will be accomplished. The bark
of the tree, taken in cold water, will remove laxities of the bowels.

76 Anar.--A name for Darim, q. vide. "Punica Granatum."

77 Aunalie.--A name for Shakakool, (Wild Carrot.)

78 Ambaray.--or Ambara, a vegetable used by the poorer classes,
resembling Sunn (hemp.) When young, it is hot, heavy, and promotes
appetite; it is useful in flatulence, and loosens the belly: when
ripe it is sweet and cool, and increases seminal secretion. In the
Dunterie it is written, that it is oleaginous and astringent.

79 Ankaloon.--The name of a salt called also Oodoobudh. Vide Loon.

80 Anbertasung.--A name for Sungbusserie.

81 Angud.--The name for Hungoot, q. vide.

82 Anjeer.--Ficus Carica. The Fig. A common fruit. Its virtues are
fully pointed out in Persian works. Another variety, called Anjeer
Deshtee, (Adam's fig,) Keonberrie. Some writers call the fig hot,
others describe it as cool, like the Goolur.

83 Aaont.--The Camel. The flesh is sweet to the taste, and light;
it increases the strength of vision and dispels flatulence, kills
larvæ in the stomach, useful in piles, and increases bile and mucus:
in P. Shootur.

84 Aoode Belao.--Lutre Lutreola, (Shaw.) The Otter? An animal, named
also Kunduss, called in P. Saqeabi. Its scrotum is called Jeunel
bedesther. Its properties fully related in all Yunani publications.

85 Aoont Kutara.--A prickly shrub, about a yard high; both leaves and
branches are full of prickles, and its flowers are yellow; its fruit
round, and also full of prickles. It is bitter and pungent, useful
in phlegm and cough, also wind; increases bile, and is diuretic;
it promotes digestion, and increases the strength of the system. If
the fresh root be cut into small pieces, and the oil extracted from
it by heat, and this oil to the quantity of one masha, rubbed over a
plaintain leaf, and externally applied, it will increase Aphrodisia,
and lengthen its duration. This oil, applied to the parts, will restore
strength. Its application will also remove an offensive effluvia from
the axillæ. Echinops Echinatus, (Roxb.)

86 Aoonk.--A plant, a yard or more in height, whose leaves are about 2
inches in breadth, and hard like the leaves of the Mocao; its flower
is prickly, and its seed very small, even smaller than the Powar,
which it resembles. There are two kind: the branches of one red,
the other white; both bitter, and promoters of digestion, decreasing
mucus and wind, removing flatulent swellings in the stomach or bowels,
and pains therein; useful in piles and Psora.

87 Ahmlee.--Called also Buzuroolreshad.

88 Aegoor.--Powerfully astringent and bitter, easy of
digestion, beneficial in disorders of blood, bile, mucus, and
also in Juzam, an antidote to poison, and strengthening eye
sight. P. Shingirff. (Cinnabar?)

89 Aechill.--The name of a reed.

90 Aent.--(Brick.) In P. Khysht. When the seminal secretion is too
thin, this is given with success; the older kind is preferred in
medicine. In the Tophutul Momeneen and other works, its virtues
are described.

91 Padill.--Sometimes called Patill, and another kind denominated
Kashta Padill or Kut Padill. Of this also there is another kind,
but as the properties of all are the same, I have not particularly
distinguished them from each other. It is the flower of an Indian tree,
which in size is equal to the Mangoe or Jamin, its pod is 1 1/2 feet
long, and 4 fingers in breadth, formed of different layers, and lined
with a soft cottony substance. The seed resembles that of the Seriss
tree, and its taste is astringent, sweet, and its properties mixed,
cool and hot. It is beneficial in swellings of a general nature, in
foulness of the blood, in difficulty of breathing, in thirst, nausea,
and loss of appetite. Its flowers correct all the natural secretions,
and remove bilious laxity of the bowels, and heartburn. The pod
relieves hiccup, and corrects bilious and mucous secretions; some
have described its properties as cool, and the Dhuntri recommends
the first kind, as the one to be preferred for internal use.

92 Paá.--Sulphur Zinci, a name for Zaje Suffed. It resembles the
Shibbi Yemani, but of a more yellow tinge, and less transparent,
but its pungency and astringency greater; placed in the fire it
becomes sublimed; its nature hot and dry. If a cloth is wetted with
its solution, and allowed to dry, and then placed in the vagina,
it dries the part, and lessens its diameter.

93 Beekhbans or Beedjbans.--A kind of green bamboo, shot as arrows
by the Nepaulese, and which poison the wound they inflict.

94 Bansa.--Called also Piábansa. Some say that it is the name of the
Baadawurd tree; however this may be, it is the name of a very common
tree, found in plains and waste places; it grows about the height of
a man, more or less; has spreading branches, which grow out of its
stem even to the root: its leaves are thin, small, and pointed, when
the tree is young; but they increase in size as the tree grows, and
become like those of the Jamin. Its flowers are white, with prickles
on their stalk. The other kind called Pia Bansa has colored flowers.

It increases wind, and clears the throat; it removes disorders of
bile, mucus, or blood, cough, difficulty of breathing, nausea, fever,
seminal weakness, juzam, and marasmus. A tooth-brush made of its wood,
materially strengthens the gums and teeth, and of this many have had
experience. It strengthens the system, darkens the color of the hair,
cures the itch, and is an antidote to poison. In its nature it is hot,
and is useful in eruptions of the skin and leprosy.

In the Maadentezerrubad, that with the yellow flowers, is called
Pia Bansa, and the tree is said to be about a yard high, with long
leaves, hot, cool, and dry in an equal degree; a decoction of the
root is beneficial as a gargle in toothache, or with the addition of
the leaves, as a gargle in ptyalism.

95 Baluka.--Cucumis Madraspatanus. A species of Kitcherie; it is
also called Kootoombur. Phoont is likewise a variety of this, and
is in Persian named Dustoombaóyé. When unripe, its taste is sweet;
it is cool, and heavy, removes eruptions of the skin from bile,
and when ripe, it is hot, light, aperient, creating appetite, and bile.

96 Palewut.--Also Palook, a medicine of India. The first is sweet,
hot, and cool, in an equal degree; it is heavy, and corrects bile and
wind. The second kind, also called Malook, is sweeter than the first,
and in all its properties resembling Padill, except that it produces
less thirst.

97 Baraykund or Keetkuroódh, or Subbuzkund.--The produce of a wet
or moist soil. Its capsule is thick and hard; it is sweet, bitter,
pungent, and increases the powers of manhood, and generally strengthens
the system; it increases bile, but removes a superabundance of
phlegm or wind. It is vermifuge, and useful in seminal weakness. Its
leaves used as greens, create appetite, improve the complexion,
and are beneficial in Juzam. I have ascertained from several books
of Hindoostan, that it is a species of Russain, and that Barayokand
and Bedareekund are one and the same plant; but some books state
the contrary.

98 Banjkakóra.--A medicine of India, of a light nature, beneficial in
mucous affections, antidote to poison, useful in boils and wounds,
also in sores; called in Persian Khora. One kind of this bears no
fruit, hence its name Banja.

99 Pakur.--A large tree, beautiful in appearance, as large as the
Jamin. The leaves also resemble the Jamin, but broader, longer,
and thicker; its fruit is yellow, and when ripe, like the apple,
but when small, it is more like the peach; it is cooling, and cures
boils, eruptions of the skin, and is effectual in mucous and bilious
affections, it also allays swelling in wounds. The fruit bears the
same name; it is acid, its sherbet cardiac, promotes appetite, and
decreases bile. By some called Pakull.

100 Panee Amluk.--A medicine of Hindoostan, hot and heavy; it cures
flatulency, and when ripe, it increases the bilious and mucous
secretions.

101 Paadae.--Pungent and bitter, hot and light, cures wind, bile,
Juzam, and fever; vomiting, dropsy, affections of the heart, general
heat, itch, disorders from poison, difficulty of breathing, and is
vermifuge. It also cures Badgola, boils and eruptions of the skin,
and removes laxities of the bowels.

102 Babchee or Bakchee, an Indian medicine, the seed of which is
black; it is beneficial in every kind of leprosy, and in every pain
of the stomach; it is used both internally and externally. I have
used 2 mashas of this, with other appropriate medicines, infused in
water for a night, strained and given as a drink to those affected
with white leprosy, and other affections of the same nature; and have
used the strained refuse externally, with the greatest success. It is
pungent and aromatic, hot and dry in the 3d deg. light and cardiac,
creates appetite, and cures affections of bile and mucus; but is
prejudicial to the eyesight, and lessens the seminal secretion.

In the Maadentezerrubad it is written, that Babchee is a seed about
the size of gram, or rather less, of a dark color, and aromatic flavor,
hot and dry in a small degree, cures wind, mucus, and Juzam; the itch
and other eruptions of the skin when discoloration or ulceration
takes place, and all complaints arising from foulness of blood. In
Acouta, or that scaly leprous eruption that is often met with, it
is very effectual, the part being first moistened with mustard oil,
and the powder of the seed sprinkled over its surface.

"Tried in Lepra without effect, both in substance and in infusion,
in 1818.--Translator."

103 Paperie.--A name for Shumshad, cool, and brightens the complexion,
and is useful in mucous and bilious complaints.

104 Babur.--Called by some Nagbo, and also Badrouje.

105 Barasinga.--Cervus Elaphus. Called so from its many branched horns;
it is about the size of a small cow, and is also called Thunkur
or Eal. Its meat is sweet to the taste, and heavy; it increases
Aphrodisia, cures wind, bile, and mucus. The horns rubbed down in
water, and applied externally, cure rheumatic and other pains.

106 Parba.--Cervus Porcinus. Very common in the upper parts of India;
its properties I have never seen noticed in any Indian publication. I
have met with a description of another kind of deer, Cheetul, and in
my opinion they are nearly alike in their properties; the flesh of
both easy of digestion, quickly increasing the volume of blood and
bulk of the solids; it is without fibres, hot and somewhat dry.

107 Bander.--Monkey. The flesh is beneficial in flatulencies,
difficulty of breathing, and Jaundice, and is vermifuge; in P. Bozeena.

108 Baag.--In P. Sher. The Tiger. Its flesh is hot, and cures
affections from wind, and complaints of the eyes. Its milk, mixed
with Soorma, is an excellent application in that disease of the eye
called Mootiabin. My grandfather experienced its good effects in his
own case in the cure of this disease.

109 Palug.--A much esteemed kind of culinary vegetable
(Spinnach.) A. Isphanach: cool and heavy, laxative, producing wind
and mucus, as also swelling of the abdomen. It is beneficial in
difficulty of breathing, and eruptions from bile. Some say that it
produces intoxication in a small degree, but this I have not found
to be the case.

110 Paan.--Aromatic, bitter, astringent, hot, and aperient. ("Piper
Betel, Lin. Warm juice, febrifuge; given in indigestion in children,
and combined with musk in Hysteria.") It creates appetite and agreeable
sensations; it also increases semen, and is aphrodisiac. It cures
disorders of wind, mucus, and of the blood; corrects vitiated breath,
preserves the gums, clears the blood, is useful in prostration of
strength from fatigue, and cures nervous head-aches. Its juice
is beneficial in giving tone to the stomach and heart, and it
promotes digestion. It corrects a cold temperament, cures cholicky
disorders, and pains of the bowels, and this I have repeatedly found
by experience. In my own opinion, and in the opinion of every Yunani
writer whom I have consulted, (with the exception of Shaik Boo Alli,)
it is hot; but the physicians of Hindoostan very generally agree
with the Shaik. Those of a hot temperament, who use much of this
plant, are subject to eruptions of the mouth, and fissures in the
tongue. Its correctors are almonds and the kernel of the cocoa-nut,
but the former is to be preferred, and the addition of the almond
increases its effects on the mental powers.

The distilled water of Paan, as described below, is recommended
for correcting a melancholic temperament, strengthening the stomach
and circulation, removing spasms in the stomach, creating appetite,
correcting flatulence, and loosening phlegm.

Take flowers of Bugloss 5 scruples, rose leaves 6 drachms, cloves
13 scruples, Paan 4 ounces, distilled water of Bugloss two pounds,
rose water 6 pounds: distil, and give as a dose from one to four
drachms. Another: take of cinnamon 13 scruples, Indian Spikenard and
Galangal, each 14 1/2 scruples; Bugloss, Soad Kufah, and dried mint,
each 19 scruples; rose leaves and cloves each 24 scruples; anise seed
(Nancha), and another kind called Rajiana, and sweet-scented flag
of Toorkistan, each 19 scruples; Paan 50 leaves or more, good rose
water 15 pounds: distil. The dose to be regulated by the temperament
of the patient.

Another: take of Indian leaf (Tezpat), 1/2 a pound; cloves, Indian
Spikenard, and anise seed (Nancha), each 4 ounces, good Paan 200
leaves; bruise all the ingredients, and let them remain in infusion
for 24 hours in 20 pounds of water, then draw off by distillation 14
pounds: the dose will be from 8 to 10 scruples given after meals.

Another: take of cloves, Oodghoorkee, each 13 scruples; reduce both to
a coarse powder; flowers of Bugloss, raspings of white Sandal wood,
each 5 1/2 scruples; Bugloss, rose leaves and Indian leaf, each 4
ounces; white Paan 100 leaves, rose water 8 pounds, distilled anise
seed water 4 pounds; infuse 24 hours in the heated liquids, and draw
off by distillation 8 pounds.

111 Pariss Peepul.--Called also Palass Peepul, (Hibiscus populneoides,
Roxb.)

112 Para, or Parud, (as it is called in Sanscrit,) Mercury. It
is hot, gives strength to the eyesight, is useful in Juzam, and is
vermifuge. A. Zeebuck. P. Seemab. It is very generally used throughout
India, in many ways, both in its native and prepared state; but in
the latter we ought to be very cautious, for it is seldom sufficiently
killed, or removed from its native state, in which it is a dangerous
drug. One grain or two grains, or even a little more, is taken for
a dose, and in some cases with success. Cups are also made of it,
from which milk is drank; they possess this virtue, that a greater
quantity of milk may be taken in this way than in any other. It is
said, that if a little Mercury be tied up in a cloth, and boiled in
milk, that the milk will have an aphrodisiac property. Should any one
have taken live Mercury, and the result be, that he is attacked with
Juzam, or other leprous affection, let him take the whole of an Indigo
plant, and cutting it in small pieces, let it be boiled in a large
quantity of water; then straining it, drink a cupful of the water
very frequently, till all is taken, and till then eat no food. All
the Mercury will in the course of the day be evacuated per urethra,
and if the whole does not make its escape the first day, the treatment
must be repeated. If the urine be received into a brass vessel, or
any other with a polished surface, the Mercury will be detected; many
people having been in this predicament, have followed this advice,
and found the result to be as I have stated it.

In a state of calcination, if it is mixed with strong vinegar, or lime
juice, and afterwards dried, if no live Mercury appears it is good;
otherwise it is dangerous. Others have said, that if mixed and rubbed
with the juice of the radish leaf, till they are incorporated, and
then a little lime juice poured over it, and again rubbed and dried,
it will be fit for use; and the less live Mercury that is perceptible,
the less dangerous it is.

To make cups and balls of Mercury, triturate the Mercury well with
pounded bricks, in an iron pot, moistening the mixture with water;
wash the whole in water, and strain through a moderately fine cloth,
till the Mercury becomes perfectly clear like a looking glass. Take
equal parts of this purified quicksilver, rock salt, and sulphate of
copper, and put them into an iron pot, with strong vinegar or lime
juice, and let the whole be well triturated for 7 or 8 hours, when the
compound will appear like butter; wash this well in water, that the
salt and sulphate be carried off, and the Mercury left behind; take
this Mercury and coat over the outside of an unburnt earthen vessel
or cup, till it shall be well covered and appear like Mercury; place
this in a dish filled with lime juice, and let it remain for a week,
then take it out and place it in the sun to dry and harden; when quite
hard, it may be used in this way, or it may be filled with water and
kept so, till the clay becomes soft enough to be separated from the
quicksilver. Milk drank from this cup will have an aphrodisiac quality,
and will increase appetite. For the formation of this cup, 9 or 10
tolahs of quicksilver will be requisite, and for the balls one tolah.

The Balls.--When the ingredients above-mentioned have, from long
trituration, acquired the consistence of butter, balls may be formed of
the composition in a fine cloth, and allowed to remain for 7 days in
lime juice; then take them out and throw them into a boiling decoction
of the Dhatura leaves, allowing it to be well boiled. The balls are
then to be taken out of the cloth and preserved for use.

In the Maadentezerrubad it is said, that if a small parcel of Mercury
be boiled in soup, made from the Bis-Copra, it will become hard.

113 Baboona, or Marehtee: Anthemis Chamomile; a common flower, Akhgwan.

114 Bans.--A. Russub. P. Ney. Its leaves like those of the Joowar,
when they are young; it is cool and a little astringent, beneficial in
dysuria, gonorrhæa, piles, in stomach complaints, bilious disorders,
and those of the blood, in cholicky pains from flatulence. Some say,
that it increases the secretion of bile. A preserve is made from
the young shoots which is much esteemed, and is useful in promoting
appetite and giving tone to the stomach, correcting an increased
secretion of bile or phlegm. The young shoots are first cut into small
pieces, and steeped in salt and water; then dried, and afterwards put
into the vinegar or other acid, in which it is to be preserved. The
root of the bamboo in equal parts, with Judwár (Zedoary), and Suronjan
(Hermodactylis), applied externally, I have found very effectual
in removing pains from the joints. The oil expressed from the fresh
joints of the plants, is also very beneficial in pains of the joints
and other rheumatic affections. Mention is made of this oil in the
Hajul Umeer and Ejale naáf, works written by me.

The joints of the bamboo are very useful as a diuretic, and they also
are effectual in producing abortion, and made into a decoction with
Cassia fistula, are recommended for recorrecting and stopping the
discharge after such an occurrence.

115 Badgan Khutay.--No account having been given of this in any of
the Yunani works, it is left for me to give a description of it. It
is a seed of a dark red color, the capsule resembles the stone of
the tamarind, but is more thin and pointed, and a little open; it is
used as an infusion with tea; it is hot, strengthens the stomach; is
discutient, removes flatulence, and the tea corrects any bad effects
that it may possess.

116 Baremoo.--A name for Dookoo.

117 Barehie.--A name for Zedoary.

118 Patirr.--The Wagtail, called in Yunani, Suffraghoon.

119 Parjath, or Parbhudder, (Bombax heptaphyllum.) The gum useful
as an expectorant in worms, corpulency, swellings, and wind; it also
increases certain secretions; the gum is called Moocherriss.

120 Balchur.--A name for Chur (Spikenard).

121 Baeberung.--A seed, black, roundish, and pointed; bitter and
pungent to the taste, hot and dry, light and cardiac; beneficial in
itchiness of the stomach, flatulent swellings, dropsy, affections of
mucus, wind, or worms, and remedies costiveness. A. Birnuk Caboolie.

122 Badjera.--Holcus Spicatum. A common grain; in my opinion hot and
dry; it strengthens the system and loins; is aphrodisiac, and corrects
acidity in the stomach, but produces flatulence.

123 Papeyha.--Papeya, Carica Papeya, W. A native of South America, now
common all over India; milky juice of the unripe fruit, vermifuge;
dose,--two table spoonfuls in warm milk, afterwards a dose of
castor-oil.

124 Papieha.--A common green bird; the poets of Hindoostan keep
numbers of them, and have an idea that the noise they make at night,
in the rainy season, produces inspiration. Its flesh is useful in
affection from wind and mucus, and is alone sufficient to remove
disorders from bile.

125 Papeitha.--"Papita nux, Nux Vomica Serapionis, Faba Indica, or
Faba Sancti Ignatii, St. Ignatius's Bean, Catalougay, belongs to a
genus called Ignatia Amara. The above description applies especially
to the Papeitha, but not to the Nux Vomica, (Cuchila,) which is a
Strychnos, this is not."

This is a medicine of foreigners, and it is said, that it has been in
use for the last century; there is no account of it in any books of
Hindoostan, or in the Yunani works; but in this part of the country
it is in general use. I have partly taken the present description
from the books of foreigners, and partly it is the result of my own
experience. In foreign language, it is called Papita. It is a nut,
round, more or less so, each weighing about a pice; it is depressed
in the centre, and of a brown color, some darker than others. Its
properties are said to be various. If one of the nuts be strung on a
thread and retained about the person, it is a security against sorcery,
and the attempted mischief will recoil on the sorcerer. Should any
one be poisoned and this be administered, the poison will thereby be
rendered innocent.

Whoever shall keep this constantly about his person, nor noxious wind
nor evil eye will affect him.

If one retti or two retti weight of this be rubbed down in water and
taken, it will cure pains in the stomach and cholicks.

It is very beneficial in the disorder called Elaous, also in paralytic
affections.

In faintings and convulsions, if the teeth are forced open, and a
little given internally, also the part of the forehead called peshanie
scarified, and rubbed with a little of the medicine, the senses will
be restored.

In bites of snakes or the sting of any noxious reptile or insect,
it is highly beneficial.

The powder of the seed is styptic, and when applied over a wound in
sufficient quantity to form a cake and bound up, it will stop any
discharge of blood.

In intermittent fever, if about 4 barley-corns in bulk be given
before the cold fit, it will render it much less severe, or remove
it altogether.

In labor, if the pains are not sufficiently effectual, 4 barley-corns
of this given, will expedite delivery; but if by mistake it be given
after delivery, it will cause a protrusion of the bowels.

In all laxities of the bowels it is useful. If a seed be allowed to
remain in the mouth, it will promote the discharge of mucus which
may oppress the chest, and will relieve acidity in the stomach.

If the nut be cut into slices and fried in sweet oil, the oil will
form an excellent application to chancres, venereal or other cuticular
eruptions.

Should any one have swallowed poison and become senseless, this oil
forced into the throat, if swallowed, will save the patient.

This oil will also have the effect of restoring sensation to parts
deprived of it, if rubbed externally.

In suppression of the menses, 7 or 8 barley-corns in bulk administered,
will give relief.

Should a tendon be cut through from a wound, filling the division
with the powder, will promote adhesion.

A tincture of it in spirits, in the strength of 25 nuts to half a
pound of spirit, allowed to remain 15 days in the sun, is aphrodisiac,
in the quantity of 16 liquid grains every night.

I have found this medicine given to the quantity of half a drachm,
more or less, mixed up into a bolus with rose-water, very beneficial
in excessive vomiting.

Once my father and I were proceeding on a journey, it happened,
that some of our people had ate in the morning, of the food prepared
the night before, which being stale, produced incessant and violent
vomiting; their sufferings were great, and the color of their bodies
completely changed. My father having no other medicine with him, except
this, gave it to them mixed with rose-water, in various proportions,
with great success.

In unremitting vomiting, it ought to be given twice, when it will
assuredly be successful.

126 Babool, vide Keekur. Acacia Arabica, W.

127 Papotun.--A plant, about a yard high; its seed is like that of the
nightshade, at first green, and when ripe, red; in appearance like
the Goonchee, covered with a very thin capsule. The leaves heated
and applied to swellings are discutient, and the root pounded and
mixed with water, applied to the carbuncle or introduced on a seton,
will effect a cure in a few days.

128 Paethaon.--Called also Culsi or Breshtpirnie. A medicine of India;
sweet, hot, light, and aphrodisiac; remedies laxities of the bowels
and abrasions of the intestines. It decreases general heat, allays
thirst, and is useful in affections of wind, mucus, bile, nausea,
and fever. In the Dhinteri, it is said to be pungent, and beneficial
in asthma, phlegm, and dropsy.

129 Patole, vide Pulwul.

130 Patera, usually called Patèla, a name of Birdee, a reed, growing
in marshy places, used for making mats. It grows about a man's height,
sometimes higher, and about the thickness of one's finger. Its ashes
are peculiarly drying, and in quality dry and moist; if sprinkled
over a sore, they quickly dry it up; if mixed with vinegar, dried,
pounded, and applied to a carbuncle, it will cure it. They are also
useful in Ukula and Nufsoodum.

131 Patung.--A large tree, a native of the hills; its leaves are
like that of the almond, and its flowers yellow. The fruit round,
and of a dirty green color when young, becoming red as it ripens,
and sweet to the taste.

Physicians of Yunan have described it as hot, useful in
bilious affections, mucus, and blood; also in boils and
eruptions. A. Bukkum. The wood is used by dyers. In the Topha it is
written, that in the quantity of 15 masha it is a deadly poison. Its
powder is excellent as an application to wounds and ulcers. A bath
formed of a decoction of the wood, clears the surface of the body,
and gives strength to the bones.

132 Putrudj.--A very common leaf, in length from three to five inches,
and in breadth two inches; of a green color, and pleasant smell; it
is strongly marked by veins, and is brought from the hills. It is hot
and light, useful in wind and piles, nausea, pain at the stomach,
flatulence, and is cardiac. A. Sadielj Hindui. Laurus Cassia,
W. Tamalapatra, S. Tezpat, H. Tez (the bark), H. Twacha, S.

133 Pithpapra.--Oldenlandia biflora. Bitter, cool, light, and in its
effects astringent; beneficial in affections and disorders of bile,
mucus, and blood; also in general heat; useful in giddiness, thirst,
and fever; it generates flatulence. A. Shaterra.

134 Batassa.--A name for Phaneer.

135 Buthua, or Pasthuk, "Chenopodium album." A plant about a yard
high, or even less; its leaves are small like the mint, soft and
serrated; when the plant is old, it becomes a little larger, but the
leaves remain the same. It is used in India as a culinary vegetable,
and ate with or without meat; the leaves are sweetish when young;
it delights to grow near water, and is found both in the wild and
cultivated state, but the wild is considered the best; it is light
and laxative, strengthens the system, is useful in affections of the
spleen, eruptions from diffusion of bile, piles, worms, ascarides in
the rectum, and corrects all natural secretions except blood. A. Kutf.

136 Butela.--A kind of Pea: see Muttur.

137 Butaer.--The Quail, Perdix Olivacea, (Buch.) Its flesh is cool,
and promotes appetite; is beneficial in fever, and corrects the three
principal secretions. Some have said, that this is a name for Tihoo;
it resembles the partridge, but is only about half the size. In my
opinion, it is cool and hot in equal degrees; it forms a desirable
food for the sick, or emaciated; it strengthens the stomach, and
produces costiveness.

138 Batees.--A name for Atees, already described.

139 Pytha.--The gall-bladder of any animal. Bile is hot and dry, but
no general account can be given of its properties, as almost that of
every animal differs from another. If goat's bile be used, it will
relieve an affection of the liver, and if it be mixed with camphor
and butter, and introduced into the ear, it will cure tooth-ache,
or rubbed into the abdomen of a child below the navel, it will prove
laxative. Cow's bile, if introduced into the ear, will cure pain
arising from wind, mucus or bile.

140 Putalphoorie.--The name of a grass, which grows in rocky places,
from which it has either derived its name or from its property of
dissolving the stone in the urinary or gall-bladder. It is a very
small plant; its leaves, like those of the Lobeia (a small bean),
when chewed are found to be very mucilaginous. It is a powerful
medicine in dysuria, and is beneficial in dissolving stones in
the urinary or gall-bladder. Of this I have several times had proof
within my own observation; and I have given it to the extent of 5 or 6
mashas in these disorders, combined with sugar, or with other diuretic
medicines, or sherbets, or even in plain water; a substitute for this
may sometimes be found in Gokroo, in cucumber seeds, or some such
cooling medicine. A distilled water from it is in use. In one case
where I used the Putalphoorie, I found, that while fresh and green,
it was not so beneficial, and induced costiveness; but when dried
and given, it was much more effectual and less prejudicial.

141 Puturjenie.--A name for Lichmuna and Lichmunie.

142 Butchudder.--A species of the Catechu tree; hot and astringent,
beneficial in Aphtha, tooth-ache, blood, itch, poisons, and phlegm.

143 Budjaesaar.--The name of a tree; the best sort is called
Bidjaesaar; it is beneficial in Juzam, ptyalism, white leprosy,
seminal weakness, ascarides in the rectum, disorders of bile and
blood, cleansing the fluids, strengthening the roots of the hair,
and it is well known as an ingredient in many formulæ.

144 Bitchoo, (Scorpion.).--A. Akrub. Its medicinal properties are
described in Yunani works. Bitchoo Diriag is small and of a blackish
color, tinged with red, and has a sting on its head with which it
wounds; its eyes are pointed, and its head is large in proportion
to its body. The author of the Dara Shekoi supposes this to be the
Singee fish.

145 Bejoura.--A. Utrudj, though some describe them as distinct species.

146 Butch.--Acorus Calamus, W. Vacha, S. Sweet-scented flag, Acorus
Odorant, F. Kalamus Nurtzil, G. Calamo Aromatica, J. Acoro Calamo,
S. Wedj. A. Agrtoorki. P. One kind of this is white; both kinds are
bitter, pungent, hot and stomachic: loosens mucus from the throat,
cures itch, mucous disorders, epilepsy, idiotism, the influence of evil
spirits. In the Maadentezerrabad it is written, that the Indians have
a belief, that if the butch be taken, cut in small pieces, and put
into an earthen pot, with ghee sufficient to cover it about an inch,
that is one part of the butch and two of ghee, and this pot placed
in Jow for 40 days, and 15 mashas of this taken daily, it will cure
paralysis and loss of memory, and all complaints arising from cold.

147 Budgerkund.--Called also Soorun, q. vide.

148 Beechnak.--The name of a poison; vide Singia.

149 Bedareekund.--A kind of Baraikund. Of this two kinds are described;
one of which is white, and called Chitturkund; the properties of all
are alike.

150 Bedarkee.--Also a name for Bedareekund.

151 Budhill.--Indian Suffergill (as it is called); the fruit of a
large tree, very common all over India; the tree is like a middle-sized
Jamin; its leaves are broad and longer than the Daak, but the latter
is round, whereas this is longish, irregular on the back, and very
brittle; when ripe the fruit is of a sweet acid taste, and when
unripe it is perfectly sour; when about half ripe, it is hot, heavy,
and flatulent, producing wind, disorders of bile, decreasing aphrodisia
and appetite, and increasing phlegm; when ripe its properties are quite
the reverse; but with respect to the disorders produced by suffusion
of bile, I have not ascertained if it is beneficial or otherwise. The
Dara Shekoi has not noticed this medicine, and for my information I am
indebted to works of Hindoostan. As far as I can judge, it increases
the tone of the stomach, raises the spirits; but taken in quantities,
it is difficult of digestion and produces flatulence. It is acid,
and therefore remedies bile, but it increases cough. The kernel
is astringent.

152 Bedhara.--A medicine of India, brought from the hills; it
is a light wood about the thickness of liquorice root; bitter and
astringent, hot and aperient. It is aphrodisiac; useful in disorders
of wind, phlegm, and blood; also in swellings of the body, seminal
weakness, and forms an ingredient in many approved formulæ.

153 Pudmeinie.--(The Winter Lilly.) The flower of the Kawul; sweet and
cool, heavy and stomachic, astringent and useful in disorders of bile,
mucus, and blood. A. Neelophir.

154 Pudumcharnie.--A kind of the above, with few leaves; light and
beneficial in mucous disorders and suppression of urine, and it
hardens the matrix. For a more particular account, see Kawul.

155 Pudumrauj.--Sweet and astringent; cool and aperient; it strengthens
the eyes, corrects corpulence, cures boils, eruptions, and is an
antidote to poison. A. Yacootlal.

156 Pedloon.--A kind of salt; vide Noon. The salt of lead, called
also Kutchloon.

157 Burrh.--A large tree of Hindoostan, very common, cool and
heavy; astringent, useful in mucous disorders, in bile, boils, and
eruptions. In the Maadentezerrabad it is called Reesha in Persian. If
the milk is applied to swellings or boils, it will effect a cure
by resolution; or if applied to the eye, will remove specks on the
cornea. If a tooth be at all loose, the milk applied to it will cause
it to fall out without pain, but care must be taken that it be not
applied to the sound tooth. If the bark of the tree be put into the
pan in which fish is fried, it will soften the bones. The young shoots
of the hanging roots and the bark, are cool, dry, and astringent; the
milk is hot and powerful; the fruit less so. If the above-mentioned
young shoots be bruised and put into a cloth, and heated over the
fire, it forms an excellent and affectual application to lumbago or
other rheumatic affections. The fruit, ate with milk and sugar, is
mentioned as aphrodisiac, and increasing certain secretions. The young
shoots of the pendent roots and leaves, and the bark are astringent,
and useful in diarrhoea. The leaf-buds are also recommended for the
same complaint, dressed with meat or otherwise.

158 Birnaan or Burna.--A tree of Adjmere; the wood of which is used
for making beads, which from their beauty are sent to different places
as presents. Its medicinal property is hot and aperient, stomachic,
beneficial in disorders of the blood, phlegm, wind, dysuria, and
emaciation; it is vermifuge, and lithontriptic.

159 Purpeeloo.--The Araaq Hindui. Cool, and useful in itch, Juzam,
hemorrhoids, disorders of blood, mucus, and bile.

160 Beridda.--A medicine of Hindoostan; cool, and grateful, increasing
seminal secretion, removing cough, hectic fever, disorders of blood,
and phlegm, and increasing the strength of the solids.

161 Pereshtpurnie.--A name for Pæthaon.

162 Berchakund.--A kind of Pindaloo; another kind is called Roomus,
also Mudwull; a third kind is Sunkal; a fourth Kashtall; a fifth
Hustaloo; a sixth Rucktall, called Ruckutkund. All these roots are
sweet, cool, dry, and flatulent; also aperient. They give tone to the
urinary bladder, remove eruptions (the consequence of suffused bile),
increase semen, phlegm, and wind; they strengthen the solids, are slow
of digestion, and increase the secretion of milk. Pindaloo is somewhat
bitter and hot, heavy, mucilaginous, and diuretic. Mudwall increases
bile, and is bitter; but it is beneficial in mucous disorders.

163 Barumbie or Soonputtie.--Sweet, cool, aperient, light; increases
the powers of perception and memory, clears the voice, cures Juzam,
jaundice, seminal weakness, foulness of the blood, and cough;
is an antidote to poisons, beneficial in swelling of the body,
in bilious affections, and is a common ingredient in all useful
formulæ. A. Zernub.

164 Burberi.--A name for Hermodaclytes. Cool, strong, dry; increases
the general heat and bile, cures disorders of the blood, phlegm,
daad, and worms. It is an antidote to poisons.

165 Bureeja.--A name for Kuna, (Galbanum.)

166 Berehta or Berehti.--(Sorrel)? (but the first is the common
name.) Kuthai; some say, that both kinds of Kuthai are called Berehti;
but it is not so, the small kind only goes by that name. Karenta
and Kutla are both names of the large Kuthai, and Kuthlee; and
Kuntkaree and Kuntkalka, are names for the small Kuthai. It is hot
and astringent, strengthens the animal spirits; is stomachic, and a
pleasant addition to the flavor of food. It is used in disorders of
mucus and blood, wind, worms, ascarides in the rectum, Juzam, fever,
asthma, pain in the bowels, cough, dysuria, emaciation, Badgola. It
is lithontriptic, and in P. is called Badinjandyshtee. The flower
called Gulkhar.

167 Purbal.--A name for Coral; see Moonga.

168 Byrumbseerjella, vide Hurhurra.

169 Peertuckhpirnie.--A species of Peereshtpirnee.

170 Buryara.--"Indian Mallow, (Sida cordifolia, W. Sida Rhombifolia,
W. Sida Rhomboidoea, Roxb. MS. Sp. Ch.) Shrubby, erect, ramous; leaves
short, petioled, rhomboid-lanceolate, serrate, 3-nerved, villous;
stipules sitaceous. Peduncles axillary, solitary, shorter than the
leaves, one-flowered, capsules 12, without beak, Roxb. MS." A very
light flower of Hindoostan, cool and dry, demulcent and emolient;
it promotes seminal secretion, and cures disorders of the spirits,
gonorrhoea, and seminal weakness. Take 24 grs. of the dried
flower in powder, and eat with milk and sugar, for the cure of the
above-mentioned disorders. Ext. Maadentezerrabad.

171 Burruntaaki.--A name for Buretta.

172 Purundha.--A name for Mahameet.

173 Pursarnie.--Hot and purgative, pungent and strengthening; expels
wind, disperses phlegm, &c. In the Maadentezerrabad, Pursarnie is
said to be a medicine of India; hot and dry, beneficial in leprosy,
boils and pains in the joints, mucous disorders, and flatulence.

174 Berahumnie, or Berrumdundie.--A wild plant, growing very low, with
very thin branches and dark-red flowers, having small prickles on them;
it is sweet, cool and light, increases knowledge and memory, relieves
pains in the back, clears the voice, and is useful in marasmus,
seminal weakness, and fever. In the Maadentezerrabad, it is thus
described--Beramdundie, a medicine of India, with prickles on its
flowers; hot and dry: seven scruples in powder taken in cow's milk,
increases memory; is aphrodisiac, and beneficial in mania; it also
removes too great irritability in the seminal vessels.

175 Berahumie.--I have given a description of this separately,
as it is so done in the Maadentezerrabad. A medicine of India, of
the herb tribe; pungent, astringent, hot and dry in the 2d degree;
beneficial in cholicks, phlegm, epilepsy, depression of spirits,
fever from mucus, and delirium from cold; it is also stomachic.

176 Peroza, or Berektummun.--A common stone, called in India Feroza. It
is astringent and sweet, stomachic, and an antidote to all poisons.

177 Biscopra.--Trianthema Pentandra. A wild grass, of a spreading
kind, about 1 1/2 or a yard long; its leaves are like those of the
Bookla Yemania, but rather less; its flowers are of a red yellowish
color, and the whole plant forms itself into a circle on the ground
of about half a yard in diameter. It is bitter, sweet, hot and dry,
also aperient. It cures boils, disorders from mucus, bile, blood,
wind, swellings, and creates appetite. It forms an ingredient in many
formulæ. One kind of this is red, and is called Rukit Bhitt; bitter
and powerfully stomachic; cool, light, and inducing costiveness;
producing wind, beneficial in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood.

178 Pystha.--The Pistachio Nut. Sweet, hot, oleaginous, heavy,
aphrodisiac, and detergent; useful in disorders of wind and mucus,
and difficult of digestion. A. Fystuk.

179 Pysturling.--A name of Chitchera or Chirchera, so called from
its fixing itself in one's clothes.

180 Bussunti.--A flower of a yellow color; cool, light, pungent,
powerfully diminishing all the secretions and sensible perspiration. Of
a sweet smell, and pleasant to the taste.

181 Bishnookrantha.-- A kind of Biscopra, of a pungent nature,
strengthening the mental faculties; vermifuge; beneficial in boils,
eruptions and mucous disorders. Some writers have given it under the
head Kuneyr.

182 Bishash.--A name for Oostoochoodoos.

183 Boqun, or Bookla, or Book.--A plant, the branches of which are
very thin, the leaves small, long and pointed; the flowers small and
white, growing on every knot of the plant; they are round, useful
in disorders from poison, phlegm, bile, and in dysuria. It also is
lithontriptic, and beneficial in general heat and delirium.

184 Bukochie.--Conyza, or Serratula Anthelmintica. One kind of
which is white, both sweet, astringent, and stomachic, powerfully
cool and dry. They are aperient, producing flatulent, tension of
the belly, promote appetite, and useful in disorders of blood and
bile, difficulty of breathing, leprosy, seminal weakness, fever,
and worms. The plant is carminative, and its seed increases bile,
is useful in white leprosy, disorders of wind and phlegm, and forms
an ingredient in many of the formula.

185 Bagerie.--Alauda. A bird, the flesh of which is cool, sweet,
and dry; beneficial in disorders of bile and mucus. In my opinion
it is hot and aphrodisiac; also cardiac, and increases corpulency;
it cleanses the blood, and is a very proper food for aged persons,
those of a cold temperament, or such as labour under cold diseases.

186 Bukaen.--Melia Sempervirens. (A species of the bead-tree.) The
Hindoos call it Mahaneeb, vide M. In the Maadentezerrabad, it is thus
described: Bukaen, is a common tree, cool, dry, and bitter; useful
in disorders of the blood, gravel, swellings, and miliary eruptions,
also piles and lumbago. If 9 mashas of the seed be bruised, mixed with
equal parts of sugar, and taken every morning in water, it will stop
the discharge from the bleeding piles; or if a seer of the seeds, when
they have become yellow, be infused in two seers of water, and buried
in the ground for 21 days, taken out, and 1/4 seer drank every morning
for six months, it will certainly cure leprosy; both Juzam and white.

187 Pushanbedh.--A. Jeuntiana. Its oil is equally beneficial, as
that before recommended for strengthening particular organs. This
and the Jeuntian are of a very different appearance, they are either
distinct plants, or have become different from peculiarity of soil
or cultivation. It is a root of a dirty-red color, or when broken,
of a bright red; in figure a little crooked. It is cool and laxative;
it is lithontriptic, cures seminal weakness, and gonorrhoea. My
late uncle used half of this, and half Mendhi, as an application
to the inside of the hands and soles of the feet of women laboring
under immoderate flow of the menses, and equal benefit was derived,
as is usually done from the Mendhi. In the Maadentezerrabad, it is
called cool and dry, removing flatulence, bile, thirst, heat, dysuria,
gravel, contraction of the urethra, and difficult menstruation.

For the cure of the above-mentioned complaints, it is to be given in
water; but for seminal weakness, gonorrhoea, dysuria, &c. it is to be
taken in goat's milk. The dose is six mashas. It grows in stony places.

188 Buckree, or Chèrie, q. vide

189 Becktindeek.--A kind of Teindoo, q. vide

190 Palass.--Butea Frondosa. A very common tree, called also Pullae;
it is a large forest tree, which in season loses its leaves and
throws out flowers of an orange or fire color; its leaves are oval;
their breadth about 3 or 4 inches; it is hot, laxative, and stomachic;
used in boils, eruptions, Badqola, gravel, piles, worms, and broken
bones. It is written, that when the white flowers of the Daak are
found, and any one shall eat the seeds and the bark of them, their
hearts will be cleansed, their understanding increased, and they
shall then ever be endowed with supernatural knowledge; it may be
advisable to eat moong ka dall along with it. Its flowers are called
Tesoo; they are astringent, curing disorders of mucus, bile, blood,
and difficulty in making water. If a decoction is prepared from
the flowers, and poured warm from a height on the parts, it will be
found useful in pains of the kidneys, bladder, and in suppression of
urine. It is diuretic, and if given with medicines of that class,
it will add greatly to their efficacy. The flowers are excellent
as a fomentation in pains; also hydrocele and schirrous swellings
of the testicle may be greatly benefitted by it. The seeds called
Palass papra, are hot and light; they cure seminal weakness, piles,
worms, and disorders of wind and mucus. In the Maadentezerrabad,
"Palass papra is said to be like the seed of the Amultas, round,
broad, and thin, of a dark-brown color; its kernel white, or yellowish,
and perfectly insipid: it is oleaginous, and smells when chewed." In
my opinion, it is useful in phlegm, and the root is beneficial in
cholic. The nurses of Hindoostan put one seed into the mixture,
which they exhibit after parturition, with much benefit, as it is
cardiac. The capsule when whole is also used in decoction. The dose
to an adult is four or five seeds, but beyond that, the opinion of
the physician is necessary. I have used the bark of the seed and the
capsule made into pills, with great success, when mixed with Goor.

191 Belaikund.--"Maadentezerrabad." A medicine of India, also called
Pullai seed, or Kaika; a seed red, round, and about the size of
a pice, but thinner: it is light as a leaf, and is hot, and dry
in the third degree. Applied to blisters on the tongue, to boils,
or other eruptions; it removes the bad skin, and cleanses the parts
below. It is purgative; removes wind, and every complaint of mucus,
cold, or itch; its corrector is ghee, or butter, and its succedaneum
Koonush. The dose is three and a half masha, or 12 grains.

192 Palass Peepul.--Hibiscus Populneoides, (Roxb.) A large tree, of
the Peepul kind; its leaves and fruit large, moist and aphrodisiac;
producing phlegm and worms.

193 Pulwull.--Trichosanthes Dioeca, (Roxb.) A culinary vegetable,
of the cucumber kind, oval in its shape; the plant low, and creeping,
like the Kanoorie or Cutcherie; they sometimes sow it with the Paan. It
is eaten either (when boiled) by itself, or dressed with meat; it is
hot and moist; promotes digestion; and strengthens the stomach and
powers of virility; creates appetite; cures cough and disorders of the
blood, and lessens the other three secretions. It is also beneficial in
fevers, boils, and eruptions. It is vermifuge; its leaves are cooling,
and cure disorders. Its branches remove superabundance of phlegm, and
its root is pungent and aperient, strengthening the stomach. Equal
in its degree. Again, it is said to be a fruit eaten by the people
of India, sown and cultivated with the Paan, because it delights
in shady places. Useful in fever, piles, and mental debility; it is
aperient and promotes digestion; and some say, an antidote to poison.

194 Billie.--The Cat; its meat is sweet, hot, and moist: of use in
mucous and flatulent disorders.

195 Billoousseeke.--Astringent; removes disorders of wind, phlegm,
cholick, or other pain of the bowels. The Bale which bears no fruit,
is called by this name.

196 Byll.--Cratoeva, or Ægle Marmelos. The fruit of jungle-tree,
like the Quince; called also Bale.

197 Bylla.--A name for Shahudae, Keekwon, Kangi, and Bursali.

198 Bulka.--Likewise a name for Kangi.

199 Bunda.--Epidendrum Tessillatum, (Missletoe.) Epidendron
Tesseloides, (Roxb.) I know not whether this is in itself a tree,
or a shrub, or from whence it makes its appearance; but it is found
growing from the branches of other trees. It is dry, and beneficial
in disorders of mucus, wind, and blood; in boils and eruptions,
and as an antidote to poisons.

200 Pynvar or Toeroota.--A species of Cassia Obtusifolia. A wild shrub
of India, about one or one and a half yard high, its seed is used
for food, and is reckoned among the farinæ; it grows like the Mooth,
especially when it is split down the middle. The color of the capsule
is brownish, long, and has an indented mark on both sides. It is sweet,
cool, dry, light, and useful in disorders of wind, bile, Juzam, Daad,
and worms. It also produces an exhilaration of the spirits. I have
found that three masha bruised, and mixed with a pound of curdled milk,
placed in an earthen vessel for three days, till it becomes fermented,
is very useful when externally applied in psora and other kinds of
itch. The seed is heating, and generally mentioned as such. It is
also light, and beneficial in itch, Daad, Zaerbad, Soorkhbad, and
produces phlegm. Its leaves and young stalks are light; and produce
flatulence and mucus. It is called by many Chukwund.

201 Ponauk.--An Indian flower, sweet and cool; useful in disorders
of the blood, bile, and mucus.

202 Punk.--In Arabic Vaheel. P. Lae, (wet clay). Cool and laxative;
useful in general heat in hemorrhoids, and in swellings of the body.

203 Bunbele.--The flower of the wild Raibele. It is astringent,
lithontriptic, and recommended in mucous and windy disorders, and in
suppression of urine.

204 Pindole.--A white earth, used for cleaning houses; sweet, cool,
moist, astringent, and beneficial in that species of leprosy, called
Soorkhbad; also in bilious disorders, and affections of the uterus. It
is also said to clear the complexion.

205 Pendaloo.--Trewia Nudiflora, (Lin.) Rottlera Indica, (Wild.) This
is of two kinds; a white, and a red. The latter is probably that called
Roomis, vide R.; the white is always called Pendaloo. It is sweet,
cool; difficult of digestion; aphrodisiac; useful in lessening bilious
secretion, in dysuria and heat, and in heightening the animal spirits.

206 Pindaluck, or Pindal, vide Pendaloo.

207 Bunpowarie.--The flower of the wild Powarie, which blows in the
hot weather; there is one kind of this, which flowers in the rains;
both are bitter, cool, light; lessens the three principal secretions,
and is useful in affections of the ear, nose, and mouth.

208 Pindkhajoor, vide Bhoomkhajoor.

209 Punna.--A name for the stone, called Zamoorud.

210 Bunslochun.--A substance produced in the hollow joints of the
bamboo; cool and allaying thirst; removing hectic fever, common fever,
difficulty of breathing, bilious disorders, foulness of blood, and
jaundice. It is called in Arabic Tubasheer.

211 Poondereek.--A name for Kawul.

212 Benowla.--The Cotton-seed. Moist, and heavy; causes bile, increases
seminal secretion and milk, both in the human and brute creation.

213 Punchcheer.--Name of a compound made of the milk of five trees;
viz. Burr, Peepul, Palass peepul, Goolur, Pakur; some, in place
of Palass peepul substitute the Seriss. It is astringent, useful
in boils, eruptions, swellings, and sudden inflammatory eruptions;
(Eczema Rubrum;) also affections of the vagina. It increases seminal
secretion and milk, and promotes the union of fractured limbs. The
leaves of the above-mentioned trees are cool, light, and astringent;
very beneficial in disorders of mucus, wind, and the blood; their
fruit produces swellings of the belly, but is useful in eruptions
caused by superabundance of bile and disorders of mucus.

214 Pungekool.--A formula of four ingredients; viz. Peepul, Peepulajab,
Chittea, and dried Ginger. It creates appetite, and is recommended
in disorders of wind, mucus, swellings of the belly, produced by
affections of the urinary bladder, and bad-gola.

215 Punjemool.--Two kinds, called large and small, by way of
distinction. The large is composed of Bale, Aginmunth, Padill,
Káshmerie Sheonak. Its taste is bitter and astringent; it is light,
hot, and stomachic; dissolves animal fat, cures disorders of phlegm,
wind, and difficulty of breathing. The small is composed of Gookhroo,
Salpurbi, Bureshtpurbi, Bereta, Rutai. Its taste is sweet, and its
properties are in equilibrium. It strengthens the system in general,
and is useful in disorders of bile and wind.

216 Bindaal.--A creeping plant, which is found on trees; it resembles
the Kusseroo, and its seed is dark-colored, like those of the Till. Its
capsule is somewhat larger than that of the Kusseroo, covered with a
black rind, which also covers a second. It is very beneficial in the
Zaerbad of horses; is pungent, and creates appetite, and is useful
in wind and mucus. It is common to hills, plains, and ditches. In
the Maadentezerrabad it is said to be a cure for hydrophobia, in the
quantity of two fruits mixed with black pepper. It is said to be
an Indian fruit like the black Hurrhe, light, bitter and elastic:
its rind is hard; and the best kind of it is yellow. It is hot and
dry in the 3rd degree. If pounded and sifted, and after a motion
introduced into the rectum, it will in a few days cause the separation
of hemorrhoids and their discharge. A fumigation of these seeds
is also very beneficial in external piles. If they are bruised and
mixed with cow's ghee, and introduced into the nose, they will cure
irritability of temper and epilepsy, and remove all complaints arising
from wind. If two or three seeds be moistened with water for a night,
and in the morning two or three drops be introduced into the nose,
it will produce the discharge of that yellow fluid from the brain
which causes the disease named Pirbaal, or loss of sensation in the
olfactory nerves.

217 Bindeakurkotheki.--A name for Banjekakora, so called from its
barrenness; pungent, useful in poisons and cough.

218 Puns.--A name for Kutel.

219 Punnus.--An appellation for Lackutch.

220 Punealae.--A plant, "Flacourtia Catafracta;" the fruit of which
resembles the Zerdaloo, and is itself like to the Neemb tree; the
leaves are like those of the ratan; unripe, it is green, but when
ripe red.

221 Poiey.--"Basella Alba et Rubra." A culinary vegetable which
grows slow and creeping; its fruit is black; cool and moist; it is
heavy and rough in the throat, thickens the voice, is soporific;
promotes the secretion of semen and mucus, and cures eruptions from
bilious disorder.

222 Podhka or Boleserie.--A large tree with very beautiful flowers,
of a sweet smell. It bears fruit like, or rather having the color
of the orange, in size and shape like the Baer, or Bulooth; it is
cool, beneficial in disorders of phlegm, bile, and affections of the
teeth, as has been ascertained by experience. The fruit is cool and
astringent, flatulent, and diminishes phlegm and bile. If chewed and
kept in the mouth, it cures tooth-ache.

223 Boont.--"Cicer Arietenum." The green, unripe Gram. It is in the
opinion of Indian physicians cool and dry; allays chordee; increases
wind; is light, flatulent, and also favors secretion of bile and
blood. The Yunani physicians differ very materially from those of
Hindoostan respecting its properties.

224 Potie.--"Cyprinus Chyssopareius," (Buch.) A very small fish; heavy,
and increasing phlegm; it is the smallest of all fish; sweet to the
taste, beneficial in all the three secretions, All the varieties of
small fish are strengthening and aphrodisiac; stomachic, and useful
in affections of wind and cough.

225 Potuck.--A kind of honey, resembling ghee; hot, dry, and light.

226 Ponda.--Saccharum Officinarum, (Sugar-cane). Sweet, cool, moist,
heavy, and aphrodisiac; strengthening the system; enlivening the flow
of animal spirits; beneficial in bilious disorders, and is diuretic. It
increases the secretion of mucus, and breeds worms in the intestines.

That which is of a red color, is cool and heavy, and allays general
heat; useful in disorders of bile and blood: remedies suppression
of urine. The black Sugar-cane is in its properties like that which
is white. The very best is cool and moist, aphrodisiac, laxative,
and increases mucus.

227 Bole.--"Myrrha." A name for myrrh; cool, increases knowledge;
creates appetite; improves a relish for food; cleanses the uterus;
beneficial in disorders of the blood and bile, and in Juzam.

228 Podeena.--"Mentha Sativa, W. Mentha Crissa, Murray, ii. 178,
Mentha viridis, Woodville, iii. 463." Arabic, Nana. It is hot and
dry; promotes digestion; allays vomiting from phlegm; is vermifuge,
peculiarly aphrodisiac; increases eye-sight, and is astringent.

229 Phalisae or Phálsa.--The fruit of a tree of Hindoostan, of two
kinds. One sweet, the other acid; the first is called Shukurie, the
second Sherbuttee. The tree of one is small, not above a yard high. The
other is as large as a mulberry tree. The fruit of the acid kind is the
largest; its leaves large, round, and partially indented. The fruit
is at first green, and astringent; when nearly ripe it is rich, and
when it arrives at maturity it assumes a dark-purple color; when red,
it is very acid; and when purple, of a sweetish acidity. The fruit is
like the nightshade berry, or even larger. It is very grateful to the
taste, and beneficial in disorders arising from a redundance of bile
and blood; loosens phlegm, and is less prejudicial than any other acid
fruits. It is also astringent; allays thirst; strengthens the stomach
and system. Its sherbet is excellent in strengthening the circulation,
and removing depression of spirits in heat, fever, and giving tone
to the stomach. It is also recommended in many other disorders. Its
sherbet is a corrector of the mogane. If 48 grains of the bark of the
root of the sweet Phálsa be infused for a night in water, and then
rubbed and strained, the infusion forms an excellent remedy in ardor
urinæ and gonorrhoea; yet the sweet kind is less cooling than the
acid species, though I have found the former the most effectual in
giving strength to the circulation and to the stomach. The expressed
juice of the Phálsa in water, boiled, is used as a condiment.

230 Bhangra.--Eclipta, or Verbesina Prostrata. A small creeping plant;
its flowers very minute. Some of them white, others of a dark color;
the leaves small, in branches and leaves resembling the mint. Another
species is called Kookur Bhangra; the plant of which is high, long,
and large. It is found at the bottom of old walls. It is bitter,
hot, pungent, and dry; cleanses the skin; cures affections of wind,
phlegm, complaints of the eyes, pains in the head and Juzam. It forms
an ingredient in many famous formulæ. If it be dug up by the roots on a
Sunday, and dried in the shade; washed seven times in the Bale sherbet,
and as often dried in the shade; and as much as may be contained in
the palm of the hand, be eaten daily by those afflicted with white
leprosy and Juzam, the disorders will be removed. The seed bruised
with black Till and sugar, and eaten, will strengthen the senses of
hearing and seeing, and will promote longevity. If during the four
rainy months, the Bhangra be used with the hurrha, bhaera, and anula,
in equal parts, and a fourth part of peepul, every disorder will be
removed, and the hair will become black.

In the Maadentezerrabad, it is said, that Bhangra is a shrub, like
the Anjedan, but somewhat larger, of a purple or reddish color;
disagreeable to the taste; hot, and dry. Of this there are three
kinds: a yellow, green, and black; it improves the eye-sight, is
beneficial in phlegm and swellings, white leprosy, Juzam, burns,
and black spots in the face. Recent writers have said much of the
virtues of the black kind; its seed is in its properties equal;
beneficial in disorders of wind, phlegm, foulness of blood, blisters,
and difficulty of breathing. If for 50 days nine masha be pounded,
bruised, and taken in water, the hair will not become white. If the
plant (black) be dried in the shade, and six masha be taken for two
months, it will blacken the hair. It is the best external application
for colouring the hair.--See Singia.

231 Phirrhud.--The name of a tree in India. Vermifuge; it cures
flatulency, disorders of mucus and blood. An antidote to poisons;
induces corpulency, and remedies seminal weakness.

232 Bhoje Puttur, called also Burje Puttur, (the birch bark.)--A
tree common in Cashmere; the bark of which may be separated into
numerous layers, like the talc, and each layer resembles paper.--The
layers are variegated, and colored with straight lines; white and
red. The Cashmerians use it as paper; in its medical properties,
it is beneficial in disorders of phlegm, bile, and blood; ear-ache,
and possession by evil spirits. In India it is used for making hookah
snakes; and if clothes be lined with it, it will prevent them from
being stained with perspiration. In Persian, it is called Tooze.

233 Bhoum amulek.--The anula tree, without the principal root; it
is bitter and astringent, cool, and producing flatulence; it allays
thirst, cough, disorders of bile, blood, and phlegm; it cures marasmus,
and is useful in hurts.

234 Phoje.--Cool and heavy, astringent and useful in bilious eruptions,
and disorders from phlegm.

235 Pockurmool.--A root; bitter, pungent, hot and stomachic; useful
in disorders of wind and phlegm, in fevers, swellings, difficulty of
breathing, and in affections of the liver.

236 Bharingee.--The bark of a tree in the hills; bitter, pungent,
hot, and dry; promotes appetite; remedies disorders of indigestion,
swellings, cough, disorders of wind, phlegm, difficulty of breathing,
fever, and pains in the uterus.

237 Bhær.--The name for a sheep, called also Mendha.

238 Bhains.--The Buffalo, called also Mahaki.

239 Bheria.--The Wolf; also named Bhuddha. Its flesh is heavy,
beneficial in disorders of wind, in affections of the eye, and
clears the voice. Its teeth rubbed down in water forms an effectual
application in specks of the cornea. This was used by my father with
success. If the teeth be suspended from the neck of a child, it will
preserve the child from the effects of an evil eye. A. Zeeb. P. Goorg.

240 Phunjeetuck.--A species of Loonia; a culinary green.

241 Bhuhira.--"Terminalia Bellerica, (Roxb. MS.) Beleric
myrobalan. P. Beyleyleh." In taste it is astringent; grateful during
the process of digestion; hot, dry, and beneficial in disorders of
phlegm, bile, and cough; strengthens the eyes, hair of the head, and
the brain. It produces a slight degree of intoxication. A. Baleludje.

242 Bhelawj.--"Bela, Semicarpus Anacardium." It is astringent and sweet
to the taste; hot and light. It promotes appetite; is aphrodisiac;
cures disorders of the wind and phlegm; useful in dropsy, flatulence,
Juzam, piles, diarrhoea, Badgola, fever, and white leprosy. It is
vermifuge, and used in boils and eruptions. A. Bilâdoúr.

I have found that its kernel used as an ingredient in a decoction
intended to promote aphrodisia, (having used it myself,) is effectual;
it strengthens the stomach and powers of virility, and cures colds
beyond any other medicine.

A friend of mine had a very severe cold in his head, for which he had
taken much medicine without relief. I first gave him the Nux Vomica to
supplant the habit of eating opium, to which he had become addicted:
from this he derived partial benefit; but it soon became as difficult
to refrain from this as from the opium. I then gave him the kernel
of the Bela made into pills with honey, and cured him of his disorder.

I also gave it to a woman who had a swelling on both sides of the
uterus, which was daily increasing, and this it also cured.

In short, this is a drug, that when it agrees with the patient,
no medicine is equal in efficacy; but when it disagrees, no drug is
more prejudicial. It will be prudent not to give it to any one of a
hot temperament.

243 Bhoom Kajoor.--A tree as tall as the Taar tree. The stem rough
and serrated; the leaves only growing at the top; they are long and
hard, and used in making mats. The tree is also called Pinkajoor. It
is sweet, cool, and moist; it allays pain, and is an excellent
application in bruises. It is beneficial in disorders of blood, wind,
bile, and debility. The Pinkajoor is brought from Mooltan or Tattla,
and in A. is called Rittub.

The Rittub, which is brought from Mecca, is aphrodisiac; strengthens
the kidnies, back, tone of the stomach, and corrects a cold phlegmatic
temperament. This is ascertained from experience. It also increases
the volume of blood; but if much is used, it produces a fermentation
therein, unless habit has rendered it innocent.

244 Bhehi.--"The Quince. The seed very mucilaginous, and excellent
in diarrhoea and dysentery." A species of pear, of a yellow color.

245 Boochitter.--Some call it Beechittúr; it is cool and
heavy, aperient, strengthening, increasing the three principal
secretions. A. Jamarookh and Koombi; also Gagundool, vide K.

246 Bhuiteroor.--Whoever shall use this as their only food for one
month, their youth will be prolonged, and their hair remain black. It
will strengthen the solids, and give universal strength. If it be
ate for 40 days, it will produce a sweet smell from the body. It is
laxative, and in A. called Soonamookey. "Cassia Senna."

247 Bhoeperus.--A name of honey.

248 Bhang.--"Canabis Sativa;" a name for Kainib, called also Bidjia; it
is pungent, bitter, hot, light, and astringent; it promotes appetite,
cures disorders of phlegm, produces idiotism; is the cause of foolish
speech and conduct, or in other words, it intoxicates; if used in
excess it produces fever, and it increases all the deleterious effects
of poison.

The author of the Dhará Shekoi says, that when he was digging
the foundation of a house in Bengal, he found a board, on which
the effects of this drug was written, and on this it was recorded,
that Mahadeo used constantly to eat of this, and that from its use,
he derived the wonderful aphrodisiac power, with which he was gifted;
he says he has tried it, and found it very beneficial.

Take of Bidjia 64 tolahs, when the sun is in the division Sirtaam,
white sugar 32 tolahs, and pure honey 16 tolahs, cow's ghee 34
tolahs. First fry the Bidjia in the ghee, then add the honey in a
boiling state, afterwards the sugar: use this in moderate doses daily,
and when it has been used for two months, strength and intelligence
will have become increased, and every propensity of youth restored;
the eye-sight cleared, and all eruptions of the skin removed; it will
prove an exemption from convulsions and debility, and preserve the
bowels at all times in a state of order. It will likewise give an
additional zest for food.

249 Bhoom Kudum.--A kind of Kudum.

250 Bhendi.--A very common vegetable of the culinary kind, from 2 to
3 inches in height: very mucilaginous. It is sweet; produces wind and
phlegm; it diminishes bile; is diuretic, and increases the seminal
secretion. "Hibiscus Esculentus."

251 Phaar.--The author of the Cashmee calls it the medicine of Shaik
Furried, because it was a great favorite of his. It is common at
Agra and Delhi; it is bitter, and difficult of digestion, and hot; it
cures fever from phlegm and bile, also diarrhoea and indigestion, and
cholicky pains in the bowels. Its virtues are many, but too numerous
for the compass of this work. The people of Hindost'han use it as a
culinary vegetable with much benefit.

252 Bhindale.--The name of Bhindal.

253 Phankra.--Mahomed Cassim says, that this tree is the Dársheeshán,
and that the name of its bark is Kagphill; it is hot, and easy of
digestion; it lessens the secretion of wind and phlegm. It is aperient,
and corrects a bad taste in the mouth.

254 Bhapungi.--The author of the Cashmee says, that this is the Anjidan
Roomi. It is pungent bitter, and hot, and is useful in removing coughs
from phlegm, asthma, swellings, wounds, worms in the stomach, heat,
and fever.

255 Phitkerrie.--"Sulphate of Alumine, Alumen. F. Alaun, G. Allume,
I. Alumbre. S. Sphatica. Shan Shub, A." Pungent, astringent,
transparent. It increases and clears the complexion; is beneficial
in seminal weakness and dysuria, in all complaints of the vagina,
in vomiting, and in thirst.

256 Bheroza.--Called also Gundha Bheroza, (Turpentine.) In its
properties it approaches the Koondhur; but its effects are more
drying. If a tent be made with this, and applied or introduced into
the vagina, it will cure any affection to which that may be subject,
and prevent habitual abortion.

257 Bhateele.--In Persian called Goolqunda. A. Verdmoonuttin.

258 Bhoodill.--The name of a piece of Talc.

259 Bhoothpees.--A name for the Ram.

260 Phaloke.--A name for Arloo.

261 Bhu'th Kutaeye.--The name of both kinds of Kutai, "Solanum
Jacquini."

262 Bhohphilly.--A creeping grass, the fibres of which are very thin,
and its leaves very small. Its seed vessels are numerous, thin, and
small, about the size of the nail of the finger; it is aphrodisiac,
and thickens the seminal fluid.

263 Phooth.--"Cucumis Momordica," (Roxb.) P. Dustumboeah. Its
properties approach those of the melon when unripe. In my opinion,
as nature has given it a sweet smell, it must be beneficial in
strengthening the heart and brain; but it encourages the attack of
putrid fever. It is used to form a sherbet with sugar and rose-water,
for the above-mentioned beneficial purposes.

264 Bhuntaki.--("The wild Bhengun; is the Solanum Melongena,") a name
for Badinjan; sweet, pungent, and penetrating, and during digestion,
bitter, hot, and light; beneficial in diminishing phlegm and bile,
strengthens the circulation, clears the complexion, promotes appetite,
and cures fever and cough.

When ripe, it is hot and heavy, and increases the bilious
secretion. The white kind is inferior in virtue to the black. Some
call it hot, others cold. I have from experience found it excellent in
giving strength to the stomach; that it is very drying, and produces
vitiated bile; from this circumstance it prevents sleep, or produces
unpleasant dreams: its correctors are ghee or oil. Although I have
stated all these properties, yet as a culinary vegetable it is in
very general use, it cannot possess them in any great degree; it is
called Benghun.

265 Pechuck.--A name for Bidjosaar.

266 Beedjbund.--(From the Maadentezerrabad.) A medicine of India, red
and black; its seed resembles that of the onion, red and shining;
the red kind is to be preferred. It is aphrodisiac, increases
seminal secretion, strengthens the back and loins. It is cool and
dry, flatulent and difficult of digestion; its corrector is sugar;
its sucoedaneum, the seed of the Antungun. The dose is one miskal
with equal parts of sugar.

267 Benth.--"Calamus Rotang." Of this there are many kinds; one kind
called Toæikam, another Jillbenth, a fourth Itchill; the whole four are
cool and cure swellings, piles, pains in the uterus, boils, eruptions,
acne, difficulty in voiding urine, are lithonthriptic, useful in
affections of wind and mucus, also foulness of blood. Jillbenth is
astringent and flatulent, and Itchill is an antidote to poison.

268 Peetul.--(Brass.) P. Bering. It is not an original metal, but
a composition. In its properties it is equally cool, hot, and dry;
it cures disorders of wind, phlegm, jaundice, and affections of the
spleen. A kind of this is called Sonepeetul.

269 Peepul.--"Ficus Religiosa." A tree of India, very large and
common; the young leaves are green, but when well formed become
yellowish; it is cool; cures disorders of bile, phlegm, and blood;
is useful in boils and eruptions. The bark of the tree is aphrodisiac,
strengthens the loins, and restrains watery discharge from the urethra;
and this I have found from experience. Some say, this is called in
P. Lirzan. Its fruit is about twice the size of the Phaìsa. It tastes
like the fig. It is called Peepulie, and is when ripe of a yellowish
color. In the Maadentezerrabad, it is thus mentioned. "The Peepul
tree in Persian is called Lirzan; in the opinion of the inhabitants
of India, cool and dry. Its fruit diminishes the secretion of bile,
promotes digestion, relaxes the bowels; and if the bark be infused in
water and applied to boils, it will hasten suppuration and promote the
discharge of the matter; if the bark be burnt and thrown into water,
it will quickly purify it."

270 Bale.--A name for Raebale; cool and light; cures disorders of
phlegm, and is an antidote to poisons.

271 Baele.--"Called also Byll, Cratoeva, or Ægle Marmelos; Wood
Apple." The name of a fruit which grows like the quince; its seeds
are larger than those of the Ryhan. I have seen the tree, it is like
the Bukaen; its leaves very soft and tender, broad and long, somewhat
like the Moong: on each small sprig it has three leaves. Some have
said that it was originally wild, but subsequently brought into our
gardens; that which is now in gardens is larger than that which grows
uncultivated. The fruit is hollowed out and used as snuff-boxes, and
for several other purposes. It is a very common tree in India; it is
bitter, astringent, and a little sweetish, hot, and moist; when ripe it
is heavy, producing phlegm, bile, and wind, causing heat of stomach,
and is difficult of digestion. It destroys appetite and induces
costiveness; but unripe it is light, strengthens the circulation,
and the whole body; induces costiveness; increases appetite, hastens
digestion, and cures disorders of wind and phlegm. I have given it
with other medicines for the cure of diarrhoea with good effect. "And
in dysentery, a table-spoonful of the pulp, made into sherbet, and
taken several times a day, has been effectual."

272 Peeloo.--"Salvadora Persica." "Careya Arborea," (Roxb.) The
Indian name for this, Araak. It is a wild growing shrub, about the
height of a long spear, (8 feet,) with many branches; it is broad
and round in its general appearances; its leaves thin, and about 1/2
an inch long. The fruit is called Peel or Peeludj; it is hot, light,
and aperient; promotes appetite, cures Badgola, piles, affections of
the spleen and wind; is lithonthriptic; useful in disorders of the
blood; it produces bile, and in all favorite formulæ, it forms an
ingredient. The fruit is also called Jhal; it is bitter, laxative,
lessens phlegm, general heat, Juzam, fever, and worms. The wood of
the Peeloo used as a tooth-brush, is excellent for preserving the gums.

273 Peoke, or Peossie.--The first milk given by any animal after the
birth of its young. A. Lubba. It increases the bulk of the solids,
and inclination towards aphrodisia, but it causes hiccough, and the
formation of stone in the bladder, and is difficult of digestion;
its corrector is sweetmeats.

274 Peease.--"Allium Cepa. Agnon, F. Swiebel, G. Cipolla, I. Pallandoo,
S. Onion." A. Bosool. Pungent, and during digestion sweet; hot in
a small degree, and in its effects resembling Garlic. It increases
mucus, removes disorders of wind, and hydrocele. There is a smaller
sort, called Karinjun, which increases bile, produces costiveness,
and cures piles. There is a third kind, which when dried is white,
and is recommended to be kept in any house to prevent the approach
of snakes or any venomous reptiles.

275 Peeplamool.--The name given to the root of the Peepul tree,
but some give the name to the whole tree, and some give the name
to the fibres of the root of any tree; but judging from the name,
I conceive it to be what I have just stated. Mool being root, and
Peepul must indicate the kind of root. The idiom is Indian, and I
think must be correct. It is bitter and pungent, dry and stomachic;
promotes digestion, cures disorders of wind and phlegm, but impairs
the eye-sight and seminal secretions.

276 Bear.--Called also Konar, "Ziziphus Jujuba." Sweet, cool, heavy,
aperient, causes wind, produces corpulency, cures disorders of bile,
wind, blood, general heat, and the disease called Rajerogue; also
allays thirst. Another kind of this, named Husthkool, and a third
called Kurkund, q. vide.

277 Peeta.--Called also Khunda, q. vide.

278 Passownie.--A name for Chírkákólie.

279 Bealduntuck.--A name for Khárkhúsuck, meaning a snake's tooth. This
is known to every one.

280 Peeche.--Congee, or rice water; it is cool and allays thirst;
it is proper food for the sick; drank with rose water, Beelemoosk
and sugar, or with pomegranate sherbet, it produces cold, strengthens
the circulation, and entirely allays general heat.

281 Beerbahootie.--An insect very common in the rainy season,
resembling scarlet velvet; hot in the 3rd and moist in the 2nd deg. One
insect, with the legs taken off, ate with Paan, is very efficacious
in paralytic disorders, and other complaints from cold. Bruised and
mixed with water, it is used as an aphrodisiac, in seminal weakness,
&c. Its oil is also used as an external application in debility brought
on by onanism, and for giving strength to the muscular fibres. Its
succed. is the Kinchua.

"I have prescribed the Beerbahootie with decided good effects in
paralysis, commencing with one and increasing to three or four in
the day: 1 or 2 given with a little pounded nutmeg is said to be very
efficacious in spasms in the bowels of children."

282 Talmukara, or Talmukana.--"Bartleria longifolia." A seed,
very small, and like the zeera, red, the color of Toodrie, but the
Toodrie is round, whereas this is longish and smaller. The plant
is knotted like a reed, and has prickles on the joints. The flower
is like the lotus, but is whiter. It is cool and heavy; increases
seminal secretion, and cures disorders of wind and blood; it forms
an ingredient in all aphrodisiac formulæ; it is taken mixed with
cow's milk, either cold or boiled. In the Maadentezerrabad, it is
thus described.

Talmukana is a medicine of India; its seed of a brown color, like that
of the Anjera; cool and moist; used as an aphrodisiac, in cases of
seminal weakness, in gonorrhoea, and in chancres. It is astringent;
strengthens the system; is flatulent, and not easy of digestion:
its corrector is sugar; its succed. Moosliesia. The dose six masha.

283 Taal, or Taar.--"Borassus Flabelliformis." A very high tree, about
60 feet, more or less; very common in the Deccan and in Bengal. At
Agra it is more common than at Delhi; the leaves grow at the top of
the stem; they are broad and long; and of these are formed Punkahs,
which are much esteemed and carried to various parts. They are also
used for writing upon; its fruit is like the cocoanut; the kernel
of the fruit is cut into pieces, and ate with sherbet and sugar;
it is very sweet to the taste, and is called the Tirkool.

The upper part of the stem of the fruit is cut across, and the
liquid which exudes from the wound, received into earthen vessels
called Labnahs, and these fill several times in the course of the
day. This liquor is called Taarie: when fresh drawn and before the sun
is above the horizon, it is sweet to the taste; but it soon becomes
fermented, and is then intoxicating. It is cool and moist, beneficial
in disorders of wind and bile, also in boils and eruptions. It is
both aperient, and aphrodisiac. A liquor distilled from the Taarie,
is to be preferred: roasted or stewed meat should be eaten along with
it. It produces pains in the limbs, and heaviness of the head, and
is as intoxicating as spirits. The fruit is sweet and cool, heavy and
flatulent, causes pains in the limbs, cures affections of wind, bile,
blood, and bruises; it relieves general heat, and allays thirst. Its
seed is also sweet, cool, and diuretic; useful in disorders of wind
and bile. P. Khoormae Aboojile, or Khoormae Hindee. A. it is called
Doom, but the author of the Munhage says, that Doom means the Googul
tree. The Maadentezerrubad thus describes it: taar is a tree like
the date tree; its leaves about a yard long; the kernel of the fruit
is often sold for the sea cocoanut. The juice of this tree is the
taarie, so well known; it is equally hot and cold, and moist in the
2nd degree. It is aphrodisiac and diuretic, induces corpulency, and if
taken to excess produces intoxication and head-ache. If fresh drawn,
it is sweet and less intoxicating; but allowed to remain for a night,
it becomes acid, and then it is very inebriating. The fresh taarie
improves the complexion, moistens the brain; is beneficial in hectic
fever, in difficulty of breathing, in depression of the spirits,
and is aperient. If allowed to remain long, it becomes sour, smells
very strong; is heating, and causes vomiting and indigestion.

In the Lyzuttoor rejal, it is thus mentioned: taarrie is an
intoxicating produce of the taar tree, very common to the eastward. The
tree resembles the date tree, but its leaves are different: when fresh,
the taarie is hot and moist, induces corpulency; is aphrodisiac,
diuretic, and when it has acquired a strong smell, is intoxicating,
and in that state, it is very heating, and produces indigestion,
with heaviness of the brain. The sherbet of the pomegranate allays
vomiting brought on by its use. Its succedaneum is a decoction of
dates called Sendhi.

284 Taalesputter.--A name of Talesphir; of this there are many
and various accounts, some call it the leaf of the wild olive,
zeatoon, and others call it the bark of the Lissaan nulaej safeer,
or Biss'bassa. The author of the Topha says, that he considers it the
same as the Tewaje Kutai. The people of India deem it hot, light,
aphrodisiac, stomachic, promoting digestion, curing difficulty of
breathing, cough, disorders of phlegm, badgola, and hectic fever.

285 Tanbirr.--"Copper." It is sweet, cool, light, and aperient:
cures disorders of bile and phlegm; useful in marasmus, Juzam, piles,
asthma, swellings, cough, and ague. It is caustic, and in A. is called
Nowhass. P. Miss. The physicians of India use it in a calcined form,
and speak much in its favour. If it be properly prepared, it will
be soluble in water. In my opinion, if it does not produce heat
in the blood, nausea, pains in the bones, and joints, giddiness,
and confusion of ideas, it will be fortunate, and will be a sign,
that it has been well prepared; and should it stand both these tests,
it may be used with comparative safety.

286 Taberuck.--A tree, the produce of Arabia; its fruit and flower
resembling the rose; during digestion it is bitter and hot; removes
bile, and blisters, and seminal debility.

287 Tubasheer, or Tubakeer, names of Bunslochun.

288 Tuputtee or Typsie, a trefoil grass.

289 Tatyrie, in P. called Teetoo; a bird, the meat of which produces
wind. "Tringa Goensis."

290 Tittereek, sometimes called Tintereek.--Its fruit, when unripe,
is beneficial in disorders of wind; is vermifuge, and destroys worms in
the rectum; it is very heavy; but when ripe, is light and astringent,
and is useful in weakness of the digestive organs, and cures disorders
of phlegm and wind. A. Simaak.

291 Tudje.--Laurus Cassie? Some say that this is Kirfa, and others
Syleekha; also called Keelkheela; it is in Indian works described as
cool and pungent; it cures disorders of phlegm, and more especially
dissipates collections of it in the small intestines; clears the
passage to the stomach or oesophagus, and promotes digestion.

292 Tedhara.--"Euphorbia Antiquorum." A kind of Seehund.

293 Turkool.--The fruit of the Taar tree, vide Taal.

294 Tarkoota, or Terookhun.--The title of a formulæ composed of peepul,
pepper, and ginger, in equal parts. It creates appetite and promotes
digestion; cures difficulty of breathing, cough, local affections of
the skin, badgola, seminal weakness, phlegm, swelling of the testicles,
and diseases of the nostrils.

295 Terisgundh or Tirjatuck.--The name of the following formulæ. Small
cardamums, Kerfa, Tezpat, in equal parts. It is said to remedy
disorders of phlegm.

296 Tirtuck.--A kind of rice, of the same properties as the Saathie.

297 Tirmirra.--The best kind of this grows in gardens. It is hot
in the 2nd degree, dry in the 1st. When fresh, it is moist, and its
juice is excellent in wounds and ulcers; it is diuretic and aperient;
produces frequent inclination to aphrodisia, and causes blindness. Its
corrector is Káou (Lettuce), or Kasni (Endive), or Koorfa, or Till. It
increases the secretion of semen, and thickens its consistence. It
is an antidote to the bite of the mongoose. If bruised and applied to
the root of the acid pomegranate it will render it sweet. A. Jerjeer.

298 Tersindiaturnie.--A kind of Jeeaphul; see I.

299 Teraemanna, called also Teraman.--It is cool, sweet, and useful in
pains of the stomach, in mucus, super-abundance of blood, giddiness,
thirst, delirium, poisons, and vomiting. Manna.

300 Teroor, called also great Dathun.--Bitter and cool; strengthens
eye-sight; cures bile, heat, diseases of the mouth and hepatic
eruptions.

301 Tirnie.--Cool and sweet, increasing eye-sight, beneficial in
bilious disorders, bile, heat, thirst, vomiting, and eruptions of
the mouth.

302 Tirdisha.--A name for Mahomeed.

303 Tyrphilla.--The name for Hurr, Bhaera, and Anula.

304 Tirpurnie.--An appellation for Jalpurnie or Tirpunnie.

305 Takkur.--The name given to a mixture of Dhaie and water.

306 Tuggur.--A name for Asaroon (Asarabece); it is sweet, hot,
moist, light, and an antidote to poisons. It cures epilepsy,
delirium, affections of the eyes, wind, and mucus. One kind of it is
red. (Asarum), excellent errhine.

307 Teluck.--A flower like the Till; hot, beneficial in mucous
disorders, and Juzam; an ingredient in favourite formulæ.

308 Telk.--Ginger.

309 Till or Tillee.--The name of a seed, from which oil is extracted,
and which leaves much refuse after the oil has been drawn. When green,
it is dry, increases knowledge, and promotes appetite. Is astringent,
reduces corpulency, clears the voice and complexion, and allays
thirst. There are three kinds of this, the 1st called Pooth, the 2nd
Tilbund, or white Till, the 3rd is wild; it is heavy and astringent,
increases mucus and bile, strengthens the head, cures boils, and all
rheumatic affections. Is stomachic, increases knowledge, and restrain
the secretion of urine. The best kind is black, next the white, and
last in order the red. The flower of the Till is useful in disorders
of the eye, such as specks, and that affection called Nachoona, and
is applied mixed with Soorma with good effect. This is stated both
in the Ejalenapheh and Elajejul-umrae.

310 Toolsi.--"Ocimum Sanctum. (Roxb. MS.) Shrubby, hairy, branches
four-sided, leaves ovate, oblong, serrated with margins, and petioles
hairy; bractes petioled, ovate, cordate, ciliate, upper lip of the
calyx round, cordate, and hairy, with corol twice its length. Its seed,
Tookmi Rehan, H. of a mucilaginous nature."

A common plant, about a yard high or more; its leaves small and
longish, and serrated at the edges. The Hindoos consider it as very
sacred, and worship it. It is a species of sweet basil (Raihan);
bitter, pungent, hot, cardiac, and stomachic. It increases bile and
general heat, cures Juzam, difficulty in making water, affections of
the liver and blood.

311 Tumakoo.--Nicotiana Tabacum, W. It is said in the Dara Shekoi,
that it was first sown in India during the reign of Akber, or in
the year of the Hidjera 1014, when it was imported from Europe, and
sown by his order; now it is every where common, and is generally
smoked. In the opinion of Hukeem Alli Gheelanee, it is hot and dry;
its smoke from its heating quality confuses the ideas, and reduces
the strength; from its discutient property, it weakens the brain,
and depresses the spirits. Those who are of a cold, moist temperament,
may derive benefit from its use, but those who are of equal temperament
cannot use it with impunity. It is useful in piles the consequence of
cold, also in waterbrash, and complaints of this nature; it promotes
digestion and dissipates flatulent pains. It increases the strength
of vision when it is weakened by the effects of cold, but adds to it
when it has been caused by heat. In difficulty of breathing or pain
in the chest, proceeding from an accumulation of viscid phlegm, it is
very useful. It is prejudicial in thin spare habits; it shuts all the
passages, decreases the power of the absorbents, and consequently
prevents the absorption of chyle, thereby weakening the system,
and drying up and emaciating the body. It produces hectic fever in
the aged, and many other disorders in which medicine is useless. Its
corrector, according to the author of the Dara Shekoi, is milk; and
he gives this wise reason for it, that cloth stained with the smoke
of tabacco can only be cleaned with milk. It is used in many ways,
chewed, snuffed, smoked, &c. but is least prejudicial when smoked,
after being mixed up with goor and preserves. I have by experience
found it effectual in wind of the stomach, in pains produced by
flatulence, and in the waterbrash; but have found it prejudicial
to those labouring under depression of spirits, or who are subject
to heartburns.

The dried plant brought from Surat is more drying than any other,
and ought to be washed in rose-water or Bedemushk before use.

It is used by the Pytans as snuff: as a cephalic it strengthens
the brain, and prevents the effects of indigestion on that organ,
but it should not be used when people have weak eyes from heat. The
author of the Ulfaz Udwiyeh says, that he had a friend who was blind,
and that meeting him afterwards quite recovered, he was surprised to
learn that his cure had been effected by his having smoked equal parts
of tobacco and Sumhaloo; the women eat the Surat tobacco with pawn:
and it increases digestion, and is discutient. It is beneficial in
those temperaments which are cold and moist, and its juice is used
for drying the vagina.

312 Tamaal.--The Serroe tree. A tree resembling the Jhow, but much
larger; in its properties resembling the Saul. It cures swellings,
general heat, and blister.

313 Tym.--A kind of fish, producing appetite and general strength.

314 Tamaalputtur.--A name for Teeridje. Some have called it the leaf
of the Tamaal tree, and named it Serroe, while others have said that it
was the leaf of the Sandal tree. It is therefore uncertain what it is.

315 Toon.--A kind of reed; its seed like the Benth; its flowers are
used as a dye by the dyers of India, and are of a yellow color; cool,
dry, astringent, producing wind, curing eruptions from an overflow
of bile, also other eruptions of the skin and Juzam. A. Arheekun,
but the author of the Topha says, that Arheekun is a name of the
Isperuck, and that it is not like the Toon.

316 Toon.--"Cedrela Tuna," W. See Sir W. Jones's description,
vol. 4. As. R. page 273. Powder of the bark and extract used in the
cure of fever.

317 Tuntureek.--A name for Tuttereek, called also Seemák.

318 Tumbole.--A designation for Paan, but what is properly called
so is a preparation used at marriages, composed of Paan bruised and
the juice expressed, mace, nutmeg, cloves, and cardamoms, all bruised
and mixed with sugar, and allowed some time till it ferment. Its use
causes exhiliration of spirits, slight intoxication, and strengthens
the system. It removes wind, is cardiac, and promotes dryness; those
of a hot and dry temperament will be injured by its use; it sweetens
the breath, and is generally known by this name.

319 Tunkaar.--"Impure Borate of Soda, Boras Sodæ." A name of Borax,
called also Zirkur; it is of two kinds, one white, called Curia,
the other named Telia. The proportion of both are the same; it is
refrigerant and detergent; strong, hot, and useful in mucus and wind,
cough, and asthma. It is burnt in the fire, pounded, and with equal
parts of Aloes and a little treacle made into pills, and as many
used daily as will agree with the stomach. These will remove pains in
the stomach, internal parts, chronic cough, difficulty of breathing,
or any complaint of that nature. It is recommended, that it be taken
every day for at least 20 days, but if this cannot be done, it may be
used at intervals for the above-mentioned complaints; this advice is
given from the Echtyarat Casmi. The whole properties of this medicine
are only known to Indian physicians, and from experience, I know it
to be a powerful promoter of digestion if taken about an hour after
meals with a little water only; it is called also Tunkunkaár.

320 Tawakeer.--A medicine of India, useful in gonorrhoea and dysuria
ardens.

321 Tombrir, also Tombie.--A bitter cuddoo. There is a kind of this in
which the seed is not bitter; it is heavy, though some call it light;
it is aphrodisiac; cures disorders of mucus and bile.

The one in which the seed is bitter, is cool, cardiac, and an
antidote to poisons; useful in cough and bile. If the seed be taken
when the moon is in the wane, bruised, and for 21 days, steeped in
the juice of ginger, its oil extracted and preserved in a bottle,
it will be found that this oil, when a year old, rubbed over the body
in weakly habits will renovate strength, and it is also said that it
will consolidate mercury.

322 Turai.--"Cucumis Acutangulus, Roxb. Hibiscus Esculentus?" A
common vegetable, bitter and dry, light and suppurating; beneficial in
swellings, marasmus, dropsy, affection of the spleen, Juzam, piles,
mucous disorders, and bile. Another kind is called Geea, and is very
mucilaginous and cool, but increases mucous disorders. A third kind
is named Arra, and is aperient and useful in bilious disorders.

Turai is a very common culinary vegetable of India, and the people sow
it in their houses; its flower is very beautiful, of a yellow color,
and the fruit is extremely mucilaginous. If it is sown at the root of a
tree or wall, it will climb for support; its leaves resemble the vine,
its fruit is about 2 or 3 inches long, and about the thickness of
the thumb or even thicker; the second and third kinds are larger and
thicker than the first, but the latter is the best, and those are to
be chosen which are thin, small, and soft. It is in my opinion cool,
moist, and aperient; beneficial in hot temperaments and weakness of
the stomach; those of a dry temperament will find it particularly
beneficial; it is a proper food for those labouring under fever. The
2nd kind is the most mucilaginous; the 3rd less so than the 1st.

323 Toour.--A kind of Arhur. "Cytisus Cajan."

324 Tooiekam.--A kind of Rattan.

325 Toodun.--A kind of Kakroo.

326 Toott.--A common tree, of the middling size; its leaves are a
little oval, very soft and easily squeezed; its fruit is half an inch
long or more, both white and black, the best without seeds, and much
less than the rest. It is sweet and easy of digestion, strengthens
the system and kidnies; is aphrodisiac, increases blood, remedies
costiveness; is hot and dry. Those without seed, more efficient than
any other. I have written what I have experienced of its effect,
but much more is said of its properties in Yunani publications. Its
bruised leaves with salt said to be suppurative and discutient.

327 Thour.--Euphorbia Neriifolia, Roxb. called also Thúr. A kind
of Zekoom, (thorny tree,) some call it Synhud, others describe it
as resembling the Zekoom, and that its fruit is like the Hurrhee,
but the Thóor and Synhud do not bear fruit. The milk of the plant
blisters the skin; its expressed oil is aphrodisiac, and possesses
other properties. A cloth wet with the milk, is used as an aphrodisiac,
and the particular manner will be found in the Ilajulumrar and the
Ijalénápheh.

In the Maadentezerrubad, it is thus mentioned: Thewér. In the opinion
of the people of India, it removes costiveness, cures affections of
the spleen and spasms of the stomach, and evacuates the bowels and
Fetuek; if its leaves are boiled in water or Dhaie with a little
salt, strained and drank with a little cow's ghee, it will cure all
disorders of wind and vitiated bile, and relax the bowels. The milk
of the Thewer is procured as follows:

Pierce the plant close to the root, and fill the wound during a night
with asafoetida, in the morning remove the gum, and attach a vessel to
receive the exuding milk, and should the juice be required very thin,
a little salt may be added to the asafoetida.

328 Tendhoo, called also Tendook.--"Diospyros Ebenum," another kind
is called Bychtendook. A tree of India, of a large size; its fruit
like the Anula, but smaller. The first kind cures boils, eruption
and disorders of wind. When the tree becomes aged, it produces the
ebony, which is the centre; it cures bilious disorders; its unripe
fruit is cool, astringent and increases wind. When ripe it is heavy,
beneficial in bilious complaints, disorders of the blood, and seminal
weakness; The second kind is nearly similar in its properties; but
is more cooling, light, and astringent.

329 Tejotee.--Bitter, pungent, hot, stomachic, useful in disorders
of mucus, wind, dysuria, cough, and convulsions.

330 Teetur.--The Partridge, "Perdix Francolinus." Its flesh increases
the color of the skin, renders the bowels costive; is stomachic,
useful in hiccup, and disorders of the three principal secretions;
beneficial in difficulty of breathing, cough, and dropsy.

331 Tendooa.--"The Leopard, Felis Leopardus." Some say the Indian name
for this is Nimonur. The people of India call it a species of tiger,
but it is smaller; it is also named Tendoo.

332 Telkirur or Telkúr.--The oil of the Kojora; it is bitter, pungent,
hot, beneficial in affections from wind, strengthens the system,
diminishes the eye-sight, increases the three principal secretions,
and produces heart-burn.

333 Tesoo.--The flower of the Palass.

334 Tezpat.--A name for Patrudje.

335 Teerun.--Cool, bitter, useful in wounds, and improves the
complexion.

336 Terbile.--A medicine of India.

337 Teetee.--The name of the fruit Karele.

338 Jamin.--"Eugenia Jambolana." One of the largest of trees;
its leaves about 3 inches long and half an inch broad, of an oval
shape. The fruit is round and of three kinds, the Deeriaie, the
Bhagaie, and Sehraie. Of the Bhagaie, there are two kinds, the largest
called Churputtra and the common Jamun. The common name of the Deeriaie
is Nadeye. All kinds are dry and astringent; cures disorders of mucus,
bile, blood, and boils and eruptions, but when the fruit is large
it is sweet, and difficult of digestion; it cures swellings in the
body. Some have called the Ray Jamun hot. The Sehraie is strengthening,
and increases semen. There is a kind of Jamun grown in Delhi, that is
without stones, and very sweet; in my opinion this is the best of all,
and next to it must rank the Ray Jamun.

That fruit which is found in the latter end of the rains is called
Bhadeya, and is also sweet. In my opinion it is cool and moist, and
stomachic, but the one without the stone, named Bèdána, is more so
than the other kinds.

The juice of the fruit is to be preferred as a stomachic, and is more
grateful to the taste. It is best prepared by being sprinkled with
salt, and shaken in a dish, which deprives it of its great astringency
and corrects its hurtful qualities.

There is a kind of jamun of the color of dry grass, of a yellowish
white color, smaller than those described, of a pleasant smell. Nawab
Assoph-ul-Dowlah at Lucknow, taking into consideration its scarcity,
brought it from the eastward, and sowed it in his gardens. It is the
now common goolaub jamun, and smells of roses; there is also a kind
of jamun at Lucknow called Phalenda.

339 Jatie.--A name for Chumbelie, "Jasminum Grandiflorum."

340 Chaab.--The fruit of the Guj peepul, cures hemorrhoids, and
resembles peepulamool in its properties.

341 Jaie Puttrie.--Hot, light, vermifuge, cures mucous disorders,
and is an antidote to poisons. It is a name for Bisbass.

342 Chakussoo.--A Jeshmoridj. If 21 grains of this be bruized and
moistened with filings of Sandal-wood in water, in a new earthern
vessel, and drank in the morning, it will be found very effectual in
Dysuria ardens.

343 Jaiphill.--"Nutmeg, Myristica Aromatica, Myristica Moschata." Hot,
light, stomachic, clears the throat, cures mucous disorders, and
allays vomiting; is vermifuge, remedies any irregularity in the sense
of smelling and cough.

344 Charai, or Charwolie; both names of Cherownjee.

345 Jaal.--A kind of fish.

346 Jaiey.--Jasminum Grandiflorum? A sweet smelling flower, bitter
and cool, useful in eruptions of the mouth from heat, in disordered
eye sight, and affections of the uterus, also in wounds and ulcers.

347 Chakoth.--A culinary vegetable, sweet and saltish, useful in
affections of wind, mucus, bile; fever, and piles. It also remedies
costiveness, improves the taste of the mouth, and clears the olfactory
nerves.

348 Chalkurie.--A name for Foo or Mujeeth.

349 Changerie.--A name for Umulchhangerie.

350 Cheebook.--A kind of Khurnie.

351 Chitchera or Chichira, also Chirchira. P. Khasmar. "Achyranthus
aspera." Pungent and laxative, increases appetite, cures disorders
of wind and mucus, daad, seulie, piles, itch, (both dry and moist,)
itchiness in the bowels, dropsy, boils, and other eruptions. Another
kind is red; both are dry and astringent. The seed is beneficial in
those eruptions, the consequence of vitiated bile. The red flowers
are very common, the white are more scarce; if the white flower
be preserved about the person, it will render one invulnerable. In
disorders of the blood, the root bruised in water and taken is useful,
mixed with dhaie and sugar, it is of use in Menhorragia cruenta. The
stem of the plant used as a tooth-brush is excellent in disorders of
the teeth, and sweetens the breath. The juice of its leaves squeezed
into the eye improves eye-sight. The seeds and leaves pounded and
drank in a seer of milk is a powerful emetic, or if they be taken
to the quantity of four tolahs daily for 21 days in congee, they
will cure bleeding, piles, and bruised and applied externally, will
act as styptics. The white flowers kept on the person, will prevent
you from being stung by a scorpion, or will remove the pain when
externally applied.

352 Chetuck.--A name given to birds that inhabit wild places,
(those more tame are called Chiria,) they are sweet to the taste;
cold and moist. Aphrodisiac, and useful in disorders called Sunpat,
and increase phlegm. Tame fowl is hot and dry, also aphrodisiac.

353 Jutamassie.--Bitter and cold, clears the skin, useful in
mucous disorders or diffusion of bile in the blood, in affections
of the throat, and is an antidote to poisons. "Spikenard, Valeriana
Jatamansi."

354 Chuttra.--During digestion it is hot, and produces a burning
sensation, curative in itch and flatulence.

355 Chuttur Phill.--A name of Syneed, a kind of Khoreacera.

356 Chichinda, also Chunchilund, "Beta Vulgaris." The root of a
culinary vegetable of India. It is of a long tapering shape like
the carrot, and is in general use. I have experienced it to be of
use in dry emaciation, and that it is sweet and stomachic, light and
beneficial in superabundance of bile, increases appetite, and removes
viscid mucus and bile. The root is laxative. Another kind is bitter,
hot, and moist, decreases bile, mucus and heat, and cures all disorders
of the blood.

357 Chachoondur, also called Chulde. "Sorex Cerulescens, Shaw." "Sorex
Ceruleus, Turton." The Musk-rat. P. Kormoosh. If its meat is applied
to the ulcer at the back of the neck called Khoonadeer, it will be
found very effectual. If its brain be dissolved in oil and applied as
a friction to the spots of white leprosy, and other discolorations
of the skin, it will remove them. If the scrotum is tied up and
preserved about the person as a charm, it will increase and lengthen
the continuance of aphrodisia.

358 Chirchirra.--A name for Chitchira.

359 Chirpoota.--A medicine of India, cool and dry, and aperient;
cures difficulty of breathing and cough.

360 Chiria.--A name for Roonjisk, called also Chituck.

361 Chirownjee.--"The nut of the Chironjia Sapida." A round or oval
seed like the peepul, of a dark-brown colour. The tree is of the milky
kind, the leaves white, or of an earthy color, an oil is expressed
from its kernel. A. Hubboossum'na. P. Nookul Khaja. It is sweet and
oleaginous, heavy and luxative, beneficial in bilious and mucous
disorders, in foulness of the blood, heat of the body, and bruises,
and it increases wind.

It is also written that Chirownjie is the kernel of the stone of
a fruit, of the appearance and taste of the phalsa, and that it is
dried and carried hence to various countries. It is very common in
Bundelcund, it ripens in the commencement of the hot weather, and the
capsule is said to be separated from the kernel in a hand-mill. The
tree is large: the nuts are strung on thread and used by the natives
as necklaces, and they are roasted and eaten as food.

362 Cherayta, called also Punsaal. "Gentiana Chirayata,
Roxb. Sp. Ch. Herbaceous, leaves stem-clasping, lanceolate, 3-5-nerved,
corol rotate, four cleft, smooth stamens, four, capsule ovate,
bifurcate, as long as the calyx." It is bitter, cool, and dry,
light, and producing wind, beneficial in cough, general heat, and
fever. A. Rusbuzzèreera.

363 Jest in P. Roo Tootia. It is hot and light, and during digestion
cool and heavy; facilitates the fusion of metals.

364 Chesteymud, called also Chestee, also Chitenmud. "Glycyrrhira
Glabra. W. Glycine Abrus, Linn." in Arabic Assóoloos'oos.

365 Chukunder.--A name for Saluk.

366 Chikara.--A kind of deer; its tail is black, and its meat sweet,
cool, light, and astringent, stomachic, cardiac, and beneficial in
disorders of wind, bile, and mucus.

367 Chukora. In P. Rubk. "A variety of Titroo Rufus."

368 Chukua Chukui.--"Anas Casarea." The Braminee Duck. Its flesh is
sweet, cool, moist, and heavy, strengthens the system, restrains the
flow of urine and fæces, cures affections of wind, bile, and blood. In
P. it is named Soorkhab and Chukawuck, A. Kumbéera.

369 Chukeerka.--The white kind of the seed, called Soorkh, a common
seed, used as a weight; properties the same.

370 Choekurk.--A name of the grain Koolthie.

371 Chukond.--A name of the Penwar or Chukwand.

372 Chukotrah.--A fruit of Hindost'han; its tree like the Rutael,
with double leaves, the under one very small. It is very easily
engrafted on the Rutael tree. The fruit is green and round; its
capsule granulated; its green color is that of a small melon; inside
it is red; the divisions very small. It is sweet, acid, and bitter,
and is ate with salt or sugar. It is cool in its properties, allays
thirst from bile, creates appetite. In no book of Hindost'han have I
been able to find any account of it. "Citrus Decumanus. The Pumalo,
Batabi Neemboo, Pumpleuoes."

373 Jooqunoo.--"Lampyris." The fire fly. P. Kermukshub
Cherag. A. Hubahub. It shines in the night during the rains.

374 Chukadana.--The name of a seed of an earthy color; hard, and
having a small kernel; it is like the Hubèbulsa, but is somewhat
larger; the latter besides is pointed at both ends, whereas this is
not. The women of Delhi give this in purges for children.

375 Jillpeelbuka, also called Jill peepul, or Phylphilabi. It is
cool and dry, and astringent; cardiac and aphrodisiac, strengthens
the eyes, cures disorders of blood, heat in the chest, boils and
inveterate eruptions; another kind of it is red, dry, beneficial in
affections of wind, mucus, and is astringent. Its fruit is beneficial
in eruption from vitiated bile. Red flowers very common.

376 Chellwuk.--A large tree of India. Its fresh leaves are used as an
application to inflamatory Daad, or other watery eruptions, as well
as the common Daad. This I have found from experience. Sybr is first
applied to produce some inflammation, and then this application is
made use of. A patient of mine was long annoyed with Daad in both
his shoulders, for the cure of which he had tried many remedies. I
recommended this, he took a quantity of the leaves, bruised them, and
applied them over the parts, but from the great heat and irritation
they produced, he quickly removed them; he then applied the Mooltance
earth, to remove the irritation, this so far succeeded, but the part
rose in blisters, the water from the blisters being discharged,
the complaint was found relieved, when the parts were well, he
again applied the leaves, this destroyed the disease, and left
the place all black. The skin soon re-assumed its wonted color,
and the disease was perfectly cured. From the above circumstance,
I am led to conclude, that the application is a very powerful one,
and acts as a blister. If they are applied to parts which have been
deprived of sensation, it will be equally effectual as Sutoobria.

377 Cheylchish.--A very hurtful kind of fish, which increases disorders
of the three principal secretions.

378 Chillie.--A kind of culinary greens, from the common vegetable
called cheel; cool, dry, light, aperient; promotes appetite, increases
knowledge, strengthens the system, cures disorders of the spleen,
blood, and the three secretions, and is vermifuge. One kind named Kutf,
also Buthua.

379 Jill Benth.--A kind of ratan.

380 Jill Butees.--Cool, astringent, producing flatulence.

381 Jill Neeb.--A small plant; its branches minute; also its leaves
like the Loonia saag; it creeps on the ground, and is to be found
near rivers. It is very bitter, and from its constant vicinity to
water has obtained its name. It is purgative, powerfully so, in the
quantity of 6 mashas. In herpetic eruptions and Lues venerea it is
very beneficial, but it can only be given with safety to those who
are not in a weak state.

382 Chumgader.--The Bat. A. Khuffash. Its blood rubbed on the feet
is aphrodisiac. Its properties are particularly described in the
Yunani works.

383 Jamalgota.--Vide Datoon. "Croton Tiglium."

384 Chumbeley.--"Jasminum Grandiflorum." A white flower, of a strong,
sweet smell, one kind is yellow, and named Soorunjati: alike in their
properties, both are hot and light, useful in head-aches, pains in
the eyes, and teeth, in boils, eruptions and foulness of the blood.

A decoction of its leaves in water will cure tooth-ache; the mouth
being repeatedly washed with it. The juice of the root taken with milk
will remove suppression of urine, and many have made the experiment
with success.

385 Champa or Chumpuk, "Michelia Champaca." A flower of India,
of a pyramidal shape, its color is a light or whitish yellow, very
beautiful, and as such is often quoted as the perfection of color.

In this part of the country, it is very common; it cures difficulty
in voiding urine, disorders of mucus, blood, and nausea. It is
pungently bitter and cool; useful in injuries of the nose, and
in general heat. One kind is called Paak Chumpa, hot and pungent,
creates appetite, improves eye-sight, diminishes mucus, and cures
bruises. The smell is cardiac and stomachic.

386 Chermbærie.--An acid fruit of India; beneficial in itchiness of
stomach, disorders of mucus and wind, depraved taste, pains of the
chest, loss of appetite, and worms. Its acid removes the effects of
intoxication; it is cool in its properties. The sweet kind is bitter,
and a little heating.

387 Junthmook.--In taste it is sweet, and is like the Saalie, (a kind
of rice;) in its effects, but the best of all kinds of rice is the
Christn daan, and that which has been sown in a soil manured by ashes,
is the lightest and best in curing mucous disorders. The rice produced
in the common manner is heavy, useful in disorders of bile and wind,
and frequent change of soil, or the plant removed or transplanted to
another soil is the best. It is diuretic and generally beneficial.

388 Jungliechuha.--P. Runfeer. Its flesh is useful in cough, difficulty
of breathing, foulness of blood; is dry and beneficial in all the
three secretions. The meat of the female is to be preferred to that
of the male.

389 Chumbuck.--Cool and decreases corpulency; is an antidote to
poison. A. Hyzr Mukunatees.

390 Chundurkanth.--Its taste is sweet and astringent; it is cool and
aperient, strengthens the eyes, reduces corpulency, cures boils and
eruptions, and is an antidote to poison. A. Hyzrool Kummur.

391 Chundsoor.--Vide Haloo. "Lepedium Sativum."

392 Chundun.--"Santalum Album, W. or Sirium myrtifolium." P. Sandal
Suffed. A little bitter; cool, dry, and light; is cardiac and
exhilirates the spirits; is tonic; an antidote to poisons; useful in
disorders of mucus, bile, and blood, allays thirst, heat in the chest,
clears the complexion. Its real name is Ujelah. Chundun, and Rukut
Chundun is the name for red Sandal.

393 Chundunsarba.--A name for white Kalesur.

394 Junth.--The name of a large tree, like the peepul; its leaves
like those of the tamarind; it is prickly, and its bark white.

395 Jawansa.--P. Khar Shooter. It is sweet and bitter, cool, light,
and aperient, cures bilious disorders and those of the blood. Also
vertigo. Hedysarum Alhagi.

396 Choke.--Bitter, soft, and emetic, useful in foulness of the blood,
mucus, poisons, worms, flatulence, itch and Juzam. "Maadentezerrubad."

"Choke is a medicine of India, it is a black juice, very acid, soft,
cool, and dry, increasing appetite, promoting digestion, stomachic
and astringent, lessens the secretion of bile, and injuries of the
tendons. Its corrector is sugar; its succedaneum Bejowra, dose 1/2
to 1 direm."

397 Chowlai or Chowrai, "Amaranthus Polygamus." One kind of it called
also gunder; a kind of culinary greens, used by the people of India;
cool and dry, useful in bilious disorders, mucus, and blood, and is
diuretic and aperient. It is stomachic, promotes digestion, and cures
eruptions from vitiated bile. Another kind of it is named mursai;
cool, heavy, and aperient; useful in seminal weakness, and disorders
of the three secretions. A. Bokulæ Yemania.

398 Juhi.--A small white flower, also a yellow kind. In the Dhunteri,
it is said there are three kinds of it, a white, yellow, and purple. It
has a sweet smell, and some have called it a species of jessamine. In
Delhi it obtains the name of Jahee Juhi, but these two words are,
properly speaking, distinct names for different flowers, and the
author of the Echtyar Casmi has described them separately. It is
cool and beneficial in affections of the eyes, and increases wind
and mucus. "Jasminum Auriculatum."

399 Juwar.--"Holcus sorghum." A. Zoorra. A grain; sweet to the taste,
cool and producing wind, useful in mucous disorders and bile, and in
my opinion is difficult of digestion. It is aphrodisiac, and if eaten
to excess, produces flatulent pains in the bowels. One kind is named
Mukaiy, and possesses the same properties.

400 Joonk.--A name for an Indian plant, about a yard high, more or
less; its leaves are small, and its seed about half an inch in length,
resembling a leech; sweet, cool, heavy, and useful in gonorrhoea,
cures wind, bile, and phlegm. Its leaves are very mucilaginous,
and the children of India play with the pods, sticking them to
their bodies like leeches. It grows in the rains, and usually in
uncultivated places.

401 Juhan.--A kind of anise seed, commonly called Adjwain Kermanie. I
have described its properties under the head Adjwain.

402 Jawakhar.--A name for Nuttroon; pungent, hot, and aperient; useful
in affections of wind, mucus, dropsy, pains in the bowels, dysuria,
and is lithontriptic. In the Maadentezerrubad, it is written, that it
is hot and dry, diuretic and aperient, useful in disorders of mucus,
wind, dropsy, pains in the bowels; is lithontriptic, and beneficial
in the spleen and indolent tumors.

403 Chouch.--A large and small kind; pungent and hot; astringent
and sweet; inducing costiveness; stomachic; beneficial in cholicks,
inflammatory pains in the spleen, and other pains in the bowels. It
is a favorite ingredient in many formulæ.

404 Chehtaon.--A tree of India; aperient, and useful in disorders of
mucus and wind; also in Juzam, boils, and eruptions.

405 Jholputtur.--A kind Asheer; cool, light, and cardiac; cures
disorders of mucus and bile, and diminishes the volume of blood.

406 Cherakakoli or Chershookla; also Chermudera; sweet, cool, heavy,
aphrodisiac, and useful in disorders of blood, bile, heart-burn,
dryness of the mouth, thirst, fever, emaciation and dropsy.

In the Dhunteri, it is also said to promote digestion, and to
be pleasant in flavor, and agreeable in its effects; to cure
suppression of urine and pains in the chest. It also is used as a
cephalic. It is said to cure affections of mucus, Juzam and worms,
and to cause an increase of bile; it is commonly known by the name
of Nuckchickenie. Vide N.

407 Choonderdhan or Jowdhan.--A kind of rice, called also Rukitsaal.

408 Cherie.--The goat; its flesh is moist and heavy, but easy of
digestion; useful in disorders of the three secretions; produces no
heat at stomach, increases semen, and renders the sense of smelling
more acute: it is also called Bukeri. A. Mehyr.

409 Jeengha.--A kind of shell-fish; hot and dry; those newly taken
are to be preferred; they are aphrodisiac, aperient, and grateful to
the taste. This may generally be true, but bad effects have followed
their use, and that which is salted is melanagogue, or produces black
bile; the corrector is oil of almonds. P. Muluch Diriae, A. Jeradool
Bahr. Some have said that the Robean is the same fish.

410 Junkar.--A name for the deer Barasingha.

411 Jojakhar.--A name for nitre.

412 Chohara.--"The date. Phoenix Dactylifera." P. called Khoórma
sunshekun; aphrodisiac; it is ate with milk. If the Chóhara is
bruised, and with salep and sugar boiled in milk, till nearly half
the milk shall be evaporated, then drank, it will be found useful as
an aphrodisiac, increasing the bulk of the solids, and if it digests
easily, it will be found peculiarly useful. If roasted and eat with
opium, it becomes astringent.

413 Chirr, and another kind, which is black; both are cold, and
useful in disorders of all the secretions, heat of the body, and
Juzam. P. Soombulutteeb.

414 Chereela.--In its properties it resembles Sèleèchih, (Cassia
Lignea.) P. Ooshna.

415 Jhow.--A name of Turfa. If bruised and mixed with vinegar it
suppurates indolent swellings, and also scirrhous swellings of
the spleen.

416 Cherkund.--A kind of Beedareekund, which is white.

417 Chundurseha.--A name for Mudukpúrnie.

418 Choocheroo.--A name for Sírphonka.

419 Jhirberie.--"Jujube." A name for wild Baer; is acid, cool, useful
in bile, cardiac, and astringent: if dried and pounded, it is called
Búrchun; this possesses all its properties, but is more astringent.

420 Jyaphupp.--Another kind of it is Tersindiapurni; its seed is made
into beads. It is also called Surupjea; it is astringent, strengthens
the hair of the head, and darkens its color.

421 Cheehuræ.--A tree of India; there is another kind called Choobnuz,
and a third kind Sátoona. Its wood smells strong and rancid; it is
hot and dry in the 3rd degree; it is very oleaginous and greasy. If
its juice be expelled by heat and collected, it is excellent
as an application in paralysis, and it also cleanses large foul
ulcers. Its milk is pungent and heating, and it is an active poison,
hot and dry in the 4th degree; applied to the skin, it blisters; it
is used in swellings from cold. Its wood is used internally in loss
of voluntary motion or insensibility and epilepsy, and it is said to
be lithontriptic. It injures the lungs, and its corrector is oil of
almonds and gum. The dose is 3 mashas.

422 Jeewuk.--Cool and aphrodisiac; increases semen and mucus; cures
disorders of bile, wind, heart-burn, emaciation, and hectic fever.

423 Cheenuk.--A tree of Hindostan; hot; useful in boils and eruptions,
affections of the heart and disorders of wind; it is astringent.

424 Jeewuntie or Jeéwúnie or Jéwá; cool, sweet, moist, light;
strengthens the system and eyesight; is astringent; useful in
disorders of mucus, wind, and bile. It forms an ingredient in
all favorite formulæ, and it removes feverish heat. The people of
India use its greens in the beginning of the cold weather as food;
the small Jeewuntie being considered as one of the best of culinary
vegetables. It is called also Saag Sherista. The large kind is named
Bheéndoorie, from its more limited mode of spreading its branches,
and the small kind, for the contrary reason, is called Béldoórie:
this spreads to a great distance, and creeps along whatever it comes
in contact with. The fruit is like the cucumber.

The above is also the name of a flower, which in the Dhunteri is said
to be aphrodisiac, and to clear the voice.

425 Jeewung.--Also Buthua. Its stem is red.

426 Cheedah.--The small pine (Senobir Jegheer); sweet; pungent during
digestion; bitter, hot, moist, light; useful in windy disorders,
and affections of the eyes, throat, and ear.

427 Cheenah.--"Millet. Panicum
Italicum. Pan. Pilosum." P. Arzum. A. Dakhun. Its properties are
nearly the same as the small seed called Kongnee.

428 Cheetul.--An Indian Deer, black and white, pyebald. Its flesh
has the same properties as the Chikara.

429 Cheetah.--Its meat is hot and heavy; useful in disorders of wind,
affections of the eyes and voice. In A. Phahus; it is also the name
of a medicine mentioned hereafter.

430 Cheel.--"The Kite. Falco Cheela," Lath. Its meat is heavy, and
increases disorders of the three secretions. In P. Ghúllevaz. A. Hydát.

431 Jeepaul.--A name for Jamalgota.

432 Cheetah.--"Valerian? Plumbago Zeylanica or Plumbago Rosea, W." A
medicine; one kind of which is red, the other purple; inside of a
yellowish color; both woods are very thin, and both are pungent,
bitter, dry, light, astringent, stomachic, and increase the powers
of digestion. The red kind, mixed with strong vinegar, and rubbed
hard on the spots of white leprosy till blisters arise, will have
the effect of removing the complaint. A. Sheetrudj.

433 Cheea or Cheetkeh, both names for Hurr.

434 Khutchur.--A. Bagul. P. Astur. The mule. Its flesh increases
strength; is aphrodisiac; it likewise increases mucus and bile.

435 Khergosh.--So called in Persian. The hare. Its Indian name is
Sussáh. Vide S.

436 Kherboozah.--So named, both in Persian and Hinduee. It is hot,
dry, light, and sweet; when ripe it increases bile, and is diuretic
and lithontriptic. Its corrector is oxymel.

437 Khuss, also Osheère.--In the hot weather it is used for cooling
houses. It is cool, assists digestion; is astringent, and cures
bilious disorders; also those of mucus and blood. It allays thirst,
cures blisters and acne, general heat, dysuria, boils and eruptions;
prolongs aphrodisia, and I have found it excellent as a cardiac
and astringent.

438 Darhuld.--The wood of a tree called Huld. It is pungent and bitter;
hot, dry, and useful in disorders of phlegm, bile, and blood, in acne,
seminal weakness, swellings of the body, marasmus, boils, eruptions,
in affections of the eye, pain in the ear; is lithontriptic, and
cicatrizes wounds.

In the Maadentezerrubad, is the following:

Darhuld is a wood of a yellow color; if bruised with Malageer, mixed
with honey, and taken, it will be found excellent in marasmus, and
as an external application in the itch.

439 Datoon also Danth or Danti, names for Hubboos Salateen. In Hinduee
Jamalgota. "Croton Tiglium, W. Jayapála, S." It is bitter, pungent,
and hot; promotes digestion; cures bilious affections, also foulness
of the blood, disorders of mucus, swellings of the body, dropsy, and
worms. It is violently purgative, and clears off the three secretions,
but more especially mucus and black bile. It is not a safe medicine
for weakly people, children, or the aged; but it is proper for those
of strong constitutions, such as the Highlanders or country people,
on whom weaker medicines have little effect. I have seen some of
the hill people eat from 5 to 10 of the nuts without producing more
than two or three motions, whereas the people of this city (Delhi)
find half a nut as much as they can well bear.

The small green substance in the centre or heart of the nut, ought
to be thrown aside, as it is poisonous. I have given this medicine
very often with great good effect, and it is a general favorite with
the physicians of Hindostan. In cholicks attended with vomiting,
I have prescribed it with good effect.

440 Daoodie.--A common plant, about half a yard high, on which grows
white and yellow flowers; it is hot and dry, and the smell of the
flowers removes disorders from cold on the brain by heating it. The
powder of the flowers, in the quantity of 6 mashas, with sugar, is
lithontriptic, and in the quantity of 3 mashas if it be boiled, and
the decoction drank with sugar, it will also be found beneficial. If
the flowers are boiled in oil, till the virtue be extracted, the oil
will form an excellent external application in all affections arising
from cold; a conserve of its flowers strengthens the stomach and the
brain, and removes depression of spirits. The juice of the leaves is
attenuating and suppurating. "Marigold, Chrysanthemum."

441 Dabeh.--A kind of grass; useful in suppression of urine; is
lithontriptic; cures disorders of bile, phlegm, and removes pains in
the urinary bladder.

442 Darum.--The pomegranate of the hills. "Punica granatum, W." It is
very acid and astringent; it increases appetite and promotes digestion;
is cardiac; decreases bile, removes depression of spirits, and the
sweet kind decreases the 3 secretions.

"The bark of the root a cure for Tænia. Boil 8oz. in 3lb. of water
to a quart. Of this the patient takes a wine-glassful, and repeats
it as the faintness will admit."

443 Darmee Saar.--The pomegranate seed. It cures disorders of bile. I
have found its powder very useful in giving tone to the stomach and
removing heated bile; it is also astringent. Mixed with medicines of a
laxative nature, it is given in India on account of its tonic effects,
and its preventing injury from other medicines.

444 Darma called also Soombulkhar, or rather it is a species of
arsenic.

445 Dakh.--Cool, heavy, aperient; improves eye-sight; increases
aphrodisia; removes fever, thirst, difficulty of breathing, affections
of wind, bile, and blood, jaundice, dysuria, and heat of body. Its
corrector is to be found in its acid, which cures mucous disorders and
eruptions from vitiated bile, and the same effects will be produced by
grapes without seeds. The hill grapes are acid, light, and useful in
mucous disorders, but in some degree increase bile. Ungoor. The grape.

446 Daad Murden.--"Cassia Alata, W." The expressed juice of the leaves,
mixed with salt, used for the cure of ring-worm.

447 Dooparia.--"Pentapetes Phænicia." The name of a common flower, of
a rose color, and white, and flowers at noon. It is light, astringent,
and cures disorders of mucus and bile.

448 Dutchina Virna.--Bitter and heavy in digestion; dry, and increasing
wind; cures cough, boils, eruptions, disorders of bile, and affections
of the eyes.

449 Durba.--A name for Doob, called also Shittbúra.

450 Durbhur.--A kind of Lawa. Vide L.

451 Dusmool.--A mixture of both kinds of Punjèmoòl; it increases
appetite; cures disorders of bile, mucus, difficulty of breathing,
cough; decreases perspiration; removes morbid inclination to sleep,
also fever, flatulence, pains in the bowels, and pleuritic affections.

452 Dukdoka.--A name for Doòdhèe.

453 Dumna.--A kind of Murzunjoosh, called also Dawna; its leaves
have a finer smell than the flower, and are very numerous. It is an
antidote to poisons; useful in disorders of the blood and the three
secretions, Juzam, nausea, and watery itch. Its properties are hot,
and it is hurtful to those of the like temperament. Its smell causes
dryness of the brain. The wild Dawna is the most powerful.

454 Dundundana.--A shrub about a yard high; its leaves like those
of the Baer. It is a trefoil, and in the centre of the three leaves
there is a capsule, which when ripe breaks and discharges the seed;
it is of a whitish brown color, some more white than others; its seed
resembles those of the safflower, but is longer and more broad. It
is used as an ingredient in the first medicine given to a child at
its birth to clear its bowels.

455 Doon also Shittbára.--The latter is white and cool; cures acne,
disorders of mucus, bile, blood, thirst, and general heat. "Poa
Cynosuroides."

456 Doodhee called also Dukdòka.--A grass of two kinds. The first
kind does not rise from the ground; its leaves green; its fibres very
small. The leaves like the Til. If the branch is broken, a white juice
exudes like milk; from this it has derived its name; it grows about
a span in diameter. The second kind has red branches, and is much
about the size of the other; the first is the hottest and best. It
is dry, heavy, and aphrodisiac; cures affections of wind and mucus,
also Juzam and worms. It is flatulent; and a third kind of it called
Mydha Seèngie; also a fourth Jhènawurha.

From the Maadentezerrubad.

Doodhee is of three kinds: The first large, called Meendha doodee;
its tree like the Bael; its fruit like the Aak, and like it too,
there is a cottony substance contained in it. Its flowers are white,
and milk exudes from its broken branches. If the cottony substance
be applied to the piles, and the patient seated over a hot place,
that the cotton become well heated, it will cure the complaint. Its
leaves are like the Paan. The second kind is very small, and remains
spread on the ground; its branches are red, and its leaves thin; it is
beneficial in gonorrhoea and in ulcers of the urethra. If it is bruised
and eaten for a year, in the quantity that can be held in the palm of
the hand, it will be aphrodisiac, increase the secretion of semen,
make the hair black, and preserve the eyesight. The 3rd kind grows
to the height of 7 or 8 inches, and is useful in seminal weakness
and diabetes. If 9 mashas be taken with sugar, it will be useful in
remedying a too hurried seminal evacuation and heartburns. The second
kind is cool and dry. "Euphorbia hirta."

457 Doodee.--A name for Hubb-ul-neel. A purgative seed, beneficial
in affections of bile, mucus, piles, worms in the belly and rectum,
in badgola, and is an antidote to poisons.

458 Doódputeya.--A name for Chirkakolie, another kind of which is
called Kakolie.

459 Doodka.--A name for Doorie; cures superabundance of wind, mucus,
phlegm, piles, worms, Badgola, and is an antidote to poisons.

460 Dhamin or Dhunoon.--A prickly tree, astringent and light, and
useful in disorders of phlegm, bile, blood, and in cough.

461 Dhunjawasa.--A kind of Jáwássá; its properties the same.

462 Dhadahwun.--The name of a tree, useful in disorders of phlegm,
wind, poisons, Juzam, piles, and Sunpat. Sunpat is a disease consisting
of loss of sensation and universal chilliness and numbness.

463 Dhaw.--"Grislea Tomentosa, Roxb. Lythrum Fructicosum, Linn." A
prickly shrub, cool and useful in bilious disorders, mucus, piles,
marasmus, &c.

464 Dhawa.--A tree, the flowers of which are generally known; it
is also called Dhatki, bitter, pungent, astringent, cool, light,
and curing laxities of the bowels; useful in disorders of bile and
blood, and is an antidote to poison; is vermifuge, beneficial in acne,
and is a little intoxicating; it is also recommended in prolapsus
ani, menorrhagia, and hæmorrhoides; it is said to be equal in its
properties.

465 Dhatura.--"Datura Metel. W. Datura Stramonium." A plant about a
yard high, more or less. It has numerous branches, like the Benghen
plant; it grows wild, and is also cultivated; its leaves are like those
of the Abassie; its seed vessel like the walnut, or rather larger;
it has small prickles on its surface, and is filled with seeds. There
are several kinds of it. One has a black flower, and also a blackish
seed vessel: another is white; the first is seldom met with, and is
the strongest of any; the flower is of the shape of the Toorhee,
(a wind instrument, a trumpet.) It is hot, heavy, and promotes
appetite, but produces vomiting; useful in disorders of phlegm,
poison, itch, worms, and nausea; clears the complexion, cures fevers,
Juzam, boils, and eruptions, as also many other disorders. It is a
very active poison; its corrector is cotton, leaf for leaf, seed for
seed, flower for flower; its nut is to be chosen in preference for
medical use. If the root of the black Dhatura be kept in the house,
it will be productive of both good luck and a good name; if it be
dried in the shade, and taken in conjee to the quantity of 9 mashas,
all white hair will fall from the head and black hair grow in its
place. If the root be dried and pounded to the quantity of 160 direms,
and mixed with 80 direms of cow's ghee, and placing it on the fire in
a new vessel, form it into the consistence of sweetmeats, then tying
up the mouth of the vessel close, place it for 40 days among paddy,
at the expiration of which time, let the person bathe and give alms
to the poor; and let him take out the preparation, and eat as much as
he can take up between two fingers, daily for 40 days, fasting; and
nothing used as food except rice and milk, abstaining from all acids;
lost strength will be restored, youth renovated, the hair never will
become white, and it will prove aphrodisiac.

If the black Dhatura be bruised and mixed with goat's milk and sugar,
and boiled, it will cure barrenness in women.

If the flowers of the black Dhatura be bruised, mixed with honey or
cow's ghee, and a little of your own blood added, and this used as a
Tilak, or ornament on the forehead betwixt the eyes, whoever sees it
will become your slave, be it man or woman. If a woman so uses it,
her husband will never forsake her!!

466 Dhunia.--"Coriandrum Sativum, W. Dhanyaca, S." Astringent,
during digestion sweet, cool, dry, and moist in an equal degree;
light, diuretic, carminative, and cardiac; increases appetite,
cures disorders of wind, bile, phlegm, and blood. It is vermifuge,
and useful in difficulty of breathing, cough, thirst, and piles;
it lessens the seminal secretion.

467 Dhak.--A name for Palass, "Butea Frondosa."

468 Dholkudum.--A kind of Cudum.

469 Dhumaha.--A creeping plant, growing near the water, covered with
thorns like the Jawassa, extending even to its flowers. It is small and
green before it flowers, like the nightshade. In the Dhuntori, it is
said to be pungent and astringent, useful in vertigo, chronic fever,
and disorders from poison. In dropsy, vomiting, seminal weakness,
and delirium, it is beneficial. I have given it with those medicines
which clear the blood, and I have found its effects to be like the
Jawassa, some indeed call it a variety of this. It is said to be
hot and dry in the 2nd degree, others have called it equal. Heated,
bruised, and applied to indolent tumours, it will be of use.

470 Dhaie..--Increases the three secretions; it is called by the
physicians of India hot and moist, that of the cow is the best. It
is astringent in its effects, restrains hemorrhage from piles, and
the following R. is known by experience to be excellent.

Take 1/2 a pow (4 ounces) of dhaié, 4 1/2 mashas of moist rice,
fried in the husk (Lahie), 2 mashas of dried ginger; stir the dhaie
well till it becomes thin, add a little water, and then add to it the
fried rice, bruise and pound the ginger, and sprinkle it in. This
must be ate daily for a week, when it will so effectually stop the
bleeding from piles, that it will not return.

471 Dhanqie or Dhaoie; cool and of a bitter taste; light, allays
thirst, is astringent, vermifuge, and antidote to poisons.

472 Dhawnie.--A name for Perishtpirnee.

473 Dheerukmola.--A name for Saalpurnie, deriving its name from the
large size of its root.

474 Dhendus.--It resembles the Quince, with a green rind; the people
of India eat it, dressed with and without meat; it is preferable to the
cuddoo; cool, beneficial in bilious disorders, and quick of digestion.

475 Deodar called also Déodarie. The name of a tree; the wood of
which bears the same name; it is resinous; hot and beneficial in wind,
phlegm, costiveness, piles, and fever. "The Fir tree."

476 Deomun.--A name for Mahumeed.

477 Raab.--Treacle; it is heavy; strengthens the system; is diuretic;
increases perspiration, and the three secretions.

478 Raje Umber.--A fruit of India; sweet, cool, astringent, and useful
in disorders of mucus and bile.

479 Rassun..--Commonly called Raisun or Rowasun; a tree about the
size of a Baer tree, or larger; it is a weak biennial plant, but
grows rapidly when transplanted. Its leaves grow on both sides of
a centre stem, like the Tamarind, and it is rather longer: the tree
grows straight from the root. The author of the Topha has described it
as a root, and says that the people of India call different medicines
by the former names, but they are both the same, and it is the common
kind that I have described. Its pod is like the Lobeia (bean.) The
flower is outside yellow and inside red, with a tinge of yellow. Its
leaves contract in the night and unfold in the morning. Some have
called it sweet and cool, and have described many varieties of it,
white, yellow, red, and grey; but I fancy the difference is merely
confined to the color of the flowers; some have said that it diminishes
strength. Its flowers are peculiarly beautiful. If its leaves are
bruised and applied moist to swellings, it either resolves the tumour
or hastens suppuration; it is bitter and heavy, cures disorders
of wind and mucus, swellings of the body, difficulty of breathing,
eruptions from suffusion of bile, itchiness in the stomach, dropsy,
and increases the powers of digestion.

480 Rajejakha. A medicine of India; astringent to the taste; dry,
heavy, and astringent in its effects; increases wind and foecal
evacuation; decreases appetite, and adds to the secretion of milk.

481 Rajehuns.--A name for Purseáwashan.

482 Rai.--"Sinapis Ramosa, Roxb. sp. ch. Annual, erect, ramous siliques
expanding, linear, vertically compressed, smooth; leaves petioled,
lower lyred; superior, sublanceolate, (Roxb. MS.) Murray II. 398,
Woodville III. 409." Cool, bitter, hot, and dry; beneficial in mucous
disorders, itch, and Juzam; is vermifuge, stomachic, and increases
diffusion of bile. A. Khirdul.

483 Raang.--Stannum, Tagarum, Tam. Hot, dry, light, and soft;
strengthens the eyes; is vermifuge; useful in marasmus, difficulty
of breathing, and a deficiency of bile. A. Rusas.

In the Maadentezerrubad, it is thus described: Raang is
called in P. Kaley; cool in the 2nd degree, and moist in the 1st
degree. Calcined, it is slightly cool and dry. If a piece of this Kaley
be put into a pot with meat, you may boil it as long as you please,
but the meat will not be properly boiled. The Kaley for internal use
is calcined, the dose from one to two soorkh.

483 Raal.--Bitter and astringent; cool, heavy, and inducing
costiveness, cures Deojur, acne, boils, eruptions, fever,
and cracks in the thickened cuticle of the feet; and it lessens
perspiration. A. Kaar, also Kikahur. It is said also, that if put
into a pipe with tobacco, and one whiff taken the 1st day, two the
second, three the third, and so on, it will be found very useful in
ulceration of the lungs. Maadentezerrubad.

484 Ramputtrie.--"Maadentezerrubad." An Indian flower which I have not
seen, but which I understand to be like the rose; its properties are,
that if it is well rubbed with mercury, it will kill it, and both
united form a black mass. More of its properties I know not.

485 Rajeneemboophile.--The sweet lime; it is heavy, and useful in
bilious disorders and wind. In my opinion it is a cool cardiac,
and decreases heat and thirst.

486 Raibele.--A name for Bael. The wild kind is called, Kynd.

487 Rashna.--Bitter and slow of digestion; cures cough, wind,
disorders of blood, and is an antidote to poison, dropsy, and mucus,
and it promotes digestion. Its leaves, root, and branches are used
in medicine.

488 Rajdooree.--A name for Jewuntee.

489 Raje Ummur.--A name for Umbarie Burrur. It is cool, sweet, and
astringent, cures some affections of the mouth and phlegm.

490 Rasie.--A name for Rudd.

491 Ruttunjooth.--A medicine of India. Its leaves are green, and its
branches red and yellow; if its branches be bruised in sweet oil,
and applied to the head, it will cure Tinea Capitis. Its name is also
Abookhoolsa. P. Cheojoora. It is a native of the hills; it is also
said to relieve weakness of sight by causing a copious flow of tears,
when externally applied.

492 Rattaloo also Runtaloo. A culinary root, common in India; sweet and
pleasant to the taste, cool and slow of digestion; removes oppression
on the spirits, bile, and general heat. It increases semen, strengthens
the system, and adds to the bulk of the solids. "Dioscorea."

493 Ruttun.--A name of Jáwáher. Ruttun (the word) used by itself means
Almass; but all compounds obtain the name of Jawàher; it possesses
all the six properties.

494 Rudd.--A name of Rassie. It is cool and heavy; strengthens the
body; removes disorders of wind and mucus, increases semen, and during
digestion is pungent and sweet.

495 Roodwunti.--A plant very generally useful.

When the Pookhnichittur shall happen on a Sunday, take the root,
leaves, flowers, and branches, taking care that your shadow does not
reach them; leave them five nights in the dew, and then dry them
in the shade. Four mashas ate with sugar and honey daily, will be
found aphrodisiac. If it be washed for 21 days in the juice of the
plantain tree, then bruised and washed in the juice of the Moondie,
sugar taken and boiled in the juice of the plantain tree, and a little
of the Roodwunti added to it, then adding cloves and cardamoms one
tolah each, musk and camphor each 1/2 tolah, and the whole made up
into balls of a tolah each, and one eaten daily in boiled milk, it
will be found aphrodisiac. If it is taken simply, mixed with sugar,
it will have an aphrodisiac property.


Another account.

Of the Roodwunti there are four kinds, black, white, red, and yellow,
male and female; the female is distinguished by some of its leaves
dropping water. It grows in a moist or watery soil, near Gwallior;
it is green, and its leaves and branches resemble gram. The leaves
of the male kind are said to transmute metals, and are considered
very valuable on that account. If one part of this, half a part of
Tirphilla, one-fourth part of Tircoota, and the bulk of the whole
of sugar be bruised and sifted, and as much ate with cow's milk,
as may be held in the palm of the hand, it will cure all disorders
to which the human frame is subject, and transmute old age into
youth. Maadentezerrubad.

If the leaves are rubbed on silver, and that put into the fire, it
will become yellow; if the leaves are thrown into melted tin, it will
assume the appearance of gold. If mercury be put into the juice of its
leaves and well stirred about, then boiled in milk or vinegar, it will
become yellow. If the green leaves be dried, pounded, and taken to the
quantity of 9 masha for 14 days, the hair will never become white. If
one direm of this and 14 direms of honey, with 10 direms of cow's ghee,
be well stirred up together and taken every morning, the body will
become strengthened, and the hair remain black. Two direms ate with
sugar, will increase appetite, and cure seminal weakness and pains
in the bowels. If its leaves are used as a cephalic, it will remove
the effects of poisons. Some call it Roowunti; it is hot and dry.

495' Roodraz.--Commonly used in India for making beads which are much
esteemed. It is bitter, pungent, hot, and vermifuge; rectifies an
overflow of blood or a suffusion of bile in the blood; cures mucous
affections and head-aches. Is useful in disorders of children, and
is an antidote to poisons.

496 Ruswut.--"An extract from the root of the Amomum Anthorhizum,
Roxb." Bitter and pungent; hot; beneficial in mucous disorders,
affections of the mouth, eyes, boils, and eruptions. In
A. Huzzood. "Mixed with equal parts of alum and opium, rubbed up
together with a little water, it is perhaps the best application in
ophthalmia ever used, applied all round the eye." Trans.

497 Russ.--In P. called Sheera. When written singly, it means the
juice of the sugar-cane. It is moist, aperient, and promotes digestion,
and removes flatulence.

498 Rusunjeen.--A name for Ruswut.

499 Russ Kapoor.--"An oximuriate of mercury." A medicine of India,
resembling the Sumbulkhar; hot and dry in the 3rd degree. It is
a poison, but is very useful in Lues Venerea; it affects the gums,
loosens the teeth, and debilitates the stomach. Its corrector is milk
and butter; its succedan is Darshékina: the dose one soorkh.

500 Rekhbuk or Rekhbukh, or Rekhba. The title given to any medicine
that promotes digestion. It is cool, strengthens the system, increases
semen and mucus, cures disorders of bile and blood, heat at stomach,
emaciation, wind, and hectic fever; it increases mucus.

501 Recktaal or Rukitkund, a kind of Péndaloo.

502 Ruckitchunden. Pterocarpus Santalinus, W.

Racta Chundana, San. A name for real Sanders wood. Sweet, bitter,
cool, heavy; it strengthens eye-sight, induces costiveness; creates
nausea, cures thirst, disorders of the blood, bile, fevers, and boils
or other eruptions.

503 Rukitsal.--Red rice. A kind of Santi; it is light and is very
beneficial; increases strength, clears the complexion, removes
disorders of the three secretions; is diuretic, clears the voice,
increases semen and wind, and removes general heat.

504 Rukitphoop.--A variety of the Kanaér; some say it is a kind of
the Biscopra; it is called by both names.

505 Rungni.--Pungent and hot; destroys appetite; cures cough, asthma,
mucus, and fever from mucus and wind. The white Rungni is pungent
and hot; increases eye-sight; consolidates (amalgamates) mercury;
promotes appetite, loosens phlegm and wind.

506 Rungtirra.--Called also Sungtirra. It derives its name from the
Emperor Allam Gheer the 2nd, because he used it as a medicine; and
because no name of a stone can ever be mentioned in the presence of
the Emperor, instead of Sungtirra it was therefore called Rungtirra.

507 Rawasun.--A name of Rasun.

508 Rohoo.--A name for Shobooth. It is slightly astringent, and in
a small degree increases bile; also gives general strength. I have
found it beneficial as an aphrodisiac in strengthening the system
and increasing semen; but I have observed that if it does not digest
easily it weakens the stomach and produces much mucus; its corrector
is ginger, honey, or other medicines of a hot and dry quality.

509 Roohus.--Vide Kundhul.

510 Roopa.--Called also Roopuk. (Silver.) Astringent, moist, cool,
aperient, cardiac, and stomachic. It augments the strength of youth,
and preserves meat from becoming putrid; decreases fat, strengthens
the brain and bones, and thickens semen, decreases corpulency,
and cures disorders of wind and bile. It forms an ingredient in all
famous recipes. Its calx is called Roopruss, and it is more powerful
than any other. Ranga resembled it in its properties, also Gold.

511 Rooi.--When very old, if stuffed into the nose, it promotes the
discharge of every thing offensive from the brain. It also cures
disorders in the head, the consequence of indigestion, as also
hemicrania. A. Kotun (Cotton.)

512 Romus or Mudwal. A name of Bindaloo.

513 Rohni.--Of two kinds, both astringent and cool; beneficial in worms
in the stomach, and affections of the throat, which it also clears.

514 Roheera.--A medicine of India; laxative; useful in wind, Badgola,
affections of the liver and spleen, and in dropsy.

515 Rahusphill.--A kind of Mowa.

516 Reewudj.--The name of a shrub, cool and useful in suppression of
urine, general heat, disorders of the three secretions, and blood;
its tree is astringent and hot; cures disorders of the mouth, and
is an antidote to poisons; it is vermifuge, cures itches, boils,
and wounds, and disorders of the blood and mucus. It prevents the
effects of evil-eyes, or demoniacal possession.

517 Reech.--The Bear. Its taste is sweet, cool, and heavy; it is
aphrodisiac, and removes affections from wind. P. Khirs.

518 Reenga.--The fruit of the Sumhaloo; produces appetite, clears
the uterus after parturition; increases knowledge and bile.

519 Reetha.--"Sapindus Saponaria. The soap-nut, soap-wort." Hot,
and useful in disorders of the three secretions, and in blood. This
however does not coincide with the result of my experience, but I
have found it useful in cases of hemicrania, as a cephalic used in the
opposite nostril: prevents demoniacal possession. A. Bunduck Hindui.

520 Rewind.--"Rheum Palmatum. Rhubarb." Laxative, stomachic, and
astringent; and if taken after meals with rose water, it promotes
digestion and strengthens the bowels. It removes mucus from the
pylorus.

521 Zeera.--"Cuminum Cyminum, W. Jiraca, S. Cumin seed." Hot and dry;
light, stomachic, astringent; increases knowledge, clears the uterus;
and of use in disorders of that viscus; it relieves flatulence,
Badgola, and vomiting.

522 Zeerki.--A name for Zuerishk.

523 Zachmeheath.--A small shrub, growing close on the ground, covering
it with its foliage; it is found by the side of fields of water; it
is of two kinds, the leaf of one small and thin, those of the other
broad and thick. The first kind is excellent in the cure of piles:
thus, dried in the shade, pounded, sifted, and taken every morning in
the quantity of a palmful with water, for fourteen days; and every
night at bed-time, taking 12 mashas of Kúnd Sia, and during its use
abstaining from all acids, or other things, which may produce wind.

524 Zerki.--A name of pepper, called also Kála Dana.

525 Zumiekund.--A name for Soorún.

526 Sanbir.--A name for Sembile.

527 Saarba.--A medicine of India, of two kinds, both sweet, moist,
and heavy; produces semen, and is aphrodisiac; cures disorders of wind,
bile, mucus, menorrhagia, and colliquative diarrhoea in fever.

528 Saramill or Sarumluk, or Saral.--The author of the Dara Shekoi
has described this as a medicine of India, and in other works that I
have consulted, it is called Sangterra. In taste it is astringent, and
heavy; beneficial in disorders of wind; and increases mucus and bile.

529 Saluk or Salook.--A flower, q. vide.

530 Sagown or Saag.--A tree of the hills of Hindostan: the upper
surface of the leaves is hard and raised like a file. Some say that
this is the Pheelgosh (Elephant's ear), from its resemblance to the
ear of the Elephant; it is cool, and useful in disorders of wind and
blood. "Tectona grandis."

531 Saalpernie or Saloom.--A medicine of India; heavy, cures fever,
difficulty of breathing, and disorders of wind, bile, and mucus;
it produces nausea, restrains diarrhoea, beneficial in dryness of
the seven dhats, strengthens the system, is aphrodisiac, and forms
an ingredient in all the favorite formulæ. In the Dhunterri it is
written, that in its taste it is pungent; having small and green
leaves, the seed-vessel about an inch long, seed small and numerous;
curing chronic fevers, seminal weakness, and swelling of the body. It
is said to be hot. "Hedysarum Gangeticum."

532 Saalie.--A tree of the hills, of which elephants are very fond,
and which soon brings them into good condition. It cures boils and
eruptions, disorders of blood and mucus, and restrains diarrhoea. Its
branches quickly take root by being planted, and when used as posts for
the support of a roof, it quickly covers the whole with its foliage.

533 Saaltie.--Commonly called Kaphoor Kutcherie; cool light,
astringent; promotes digestion, cures cough and disorders of the
blood. A species of Kachoor, having a pleasant smell like Camphor.

534 Saaje.--A name for Serje, q. v.

535 Sawang.--A culinary grain, used by the villagers; it is smaller
than the Badjera, is smooth and pointed; it grows also wild, of a
smaller size. It is cool and dry; useful in bilious disorders and
mucus, and dries the seven d'hats.

536 Saal.--Sweet to the taste and pungently sweet in digestion;
cool, light, astringent; cures disorders of wind, bile, and mucus,
and preserves the health. There are other kinds of this, but this
is the one to be preferred. One kind is red, called Rakitsal; it is
nearly of the same nature, (a kind of rice).

537 Salamookh.--A kind of rice like the former.

538 Saro.--(Myna). Its meat is dry and moist in equal degrees;
increases knowledge and appetite, strengthens the system, removes
laxities of the bowels, useful in bruises and hurts, relieves cough,
lessens mucus and hectic fever; it is called Sawur, and in A. Zerzore,
P. Sharug.

539 Sabur.--A kind of deer, whose skin is used in covering sheaths
for swords, and by the lower classes and hunters as lining for their
clothes. Its meat is sweet; in digestion it is cool, moist, and heavy;
increases mucus, and cures disorders from diffusion of bile.

540 Sarass.--A species of heron, "Ardea Antigone." A large bird, with
a long neck and legs, of a lead color; the male lives always with his
mate. Its flesh is cool, moist, and heavy; strengthens the system,
decreases urine and fæces, cures disorders of wind, blood and bile.

541 Saamp.--The Snake. Its meat is moist and heavy, is vermifuge,
and kills worms in the rectum; increases knowledge, strengthens the
system. If the old skin when shed be bruised and applied to the eyes,
it increases the strength of vision; and if burnt, and its ashes
rubbed on parts where no hair grows, it will reproduce it. Snakes
avoid its smell when burning, and if the whole skin be tied round
the thigh of a woman in labor, it will facilitate the process. P. Mar.

542 Saal.--The name of a common tree, the wood of which is generally
useful. It is cool and astringent; cures disorders of wind, mucus,
poisons, boils, eruptions, and is beneficial in burns. A. Saage.

543 Satoon.--A name for Chitoor.

544 Sip Kullie.--The Lizard. A. Saamaberus, P. Chillpusæ. It does
not frequent those places where saffron is kept. If split open and
applied to a part where a thorn or arrow may have entered deep,
it will effect its extraction by suction.

545 Soopearee.--"Areca Catechu." Astringent, cool, dry, and heavy;
cures disorders of mucus and bile, increases appetite; removes
bad taste in the mouth; when fresh it is very heavy and produces
flatulence; is diaphoretic; injures appetite and eyesight, and causes
a prolonged retention of semen.

546 Subskun.--A name for Baraikund.

547 Sutarie.--The juice of the Soopearee tree; it strengthens the
teeth and stomach, contracts the vagina, and cures leucorrhoea;
it is intoxicating.

548 Setoopula.--A kind of sugar.

549 Setawur,--also Setawurie or Shetawur, vide S.

550 Sutputtrie.--A name for Roocha, vide R.

551 Sutsar.--A kind of cucumber.

552 Suteepulas.--A kind of Kutchoor.

553 Soocherakhar.--The common Sedjee, (impure carb. of soda.) This
name is given to the purer sorts. If 3 mashas be mixed with a cupful
of dhaie, it is useful in cholicks. If mixed with lime juice, it is
used to write on stone, and the stone placed on a slow fire as long
as you can snap your fingers 100 times, and then taken off, when the
writing will be found white and permanent. The physician Nouruddee
has mentioned this to be the case.

554 Sedarth.--Pungent and bitter, hot and dry; cures disorders of
mucus, itch, Juzam, apthæ; is vermifuge, and promotes appetite,
but causes diffusion of the bile in the blood, and its consequent
disorders. The green leaves are heavy and cool. In my opinion they
are hot, and obstruct the flow of urine, increase indigestion, and
disorders of the three secretions. The above is a white kind of Sersom,
the name taken from the Sanscrit.

555 Sud Sohaung.--The name of a red flower in India; its leaves
three-cornered, serrated; it is cool, and beneficial in disorders
from poisons, bile, blood; in dropsy and nausea; 3 mashas of this
bruised and taken with water is useful in gonorrhoea.

556 Suda Khar.--A salt from a grass, very hot, and is used for
cleansing lardaceous matter from sores; it increases the opening in
boils, but decreases strength.

557 Sudaphill or Sudeephill.--A name for Bale.

558 Sudagolab.--A flower like the rose. Its tree is larger than the
rose-bush, and its flower has a different smell; it is always in
flower, from which circumstance it derives its name. I have not seen
this noticed in any other work of India, but it is probably the Koocha:
q. v.

559 Surphoka.--A plant of India, about a yard in height or sometimes
more. It is very common; it is also called Joojer, and is a kind of
Chirchirra Soorkh. It is bitter, astringent, and light; cures disorders
of the liver and spleen, boils and eruptions, and cough; is an antidote
to poisons; useful in disorders of the blood, difficulty of breathing,
and fever. I have found it very beneficial in clearing the blood,
and useful in correcting bile, curing itch, lues, and other eruptions.

560 Serje.--A name for Saaje. "Tectona grandis."

561 Sooryalee.--A plant about 6 feet high. I have seen it in Hissar in
abundance; it grows in the rains and spreads over the sides of houses,
its stem is then about an inch in diameter; its branches also thin,
and of a bright red colour; its flowers are beautiful, white and
red; when ripe it in some degree resembles wheat; its flowers are
crooked. It is aphrodisiac.

562 Sirpund.--Aperient; cures general swellings, and disorders of
wind and bile.

563 Sericbans.--Useful in mucous disorders and affections of the eyes.

564 Seriss.--"Mimosa Seris," called also Sereeka; a very large tree
of India. Its flowers have a sweet smell, and are very beautiful; it
is cool, cures boils and eruptions, poisons, aches, and swellings. If
a decoction of the leaves be taken internally in ophthalmia, and the
juice of the leaves dropped into the eye, it will be very useful, and
this I have tried. The bark of the tree dried and pounded is excellent
when sprinkled on foul ulcers, in which too it kills maggots. The smell
of the flower is useful in head-aches and hemicrania, in cough and
in jaundice. If the root of the white Seriss be kept in the mouth, it
lengthens aphrodisia. Some have called this Layetoolatees. If the seeds
be bruised with water, and this dropt into the eye, it will remove
specks; the oil of the seed is also very effectual for this purpose.


Maadentezerrubad.

"Seriss is among the Indian physicians, hot and dry, and in the
opinion of some cool and dry; it cures swellings and wind. If the
bark of the stem, the bark of the root, with the flowers and seeds
of each, 3 mashas, be bruised, sifted, and mixed with cow's urine,
and taken thrice a day, it will cure the bite of a snake, and for
one whole year no reptile will injure you. The bark of an aged
tree is the best. When the sun shall be in the division Joura,
if daily for three days, 6 mashas of the bark be taken in congee,
it will render the person invulnerable to the bite of any noxious
reptile for a year. If the oil be extracted by heat from the seeds,
and applied to the white spots of leprosy, it will cure them."

565 Sirool.--Bitter, hot, and light; cures affections of the throat,
ear, eye, and disorders of wind.

566 Sirsom or Seerkup. P. Sirshuph.--In India this is used to produce
a very common oil; it is hot, and increases disorders of the mouth,
and decreases mucus and semen; expels wind; is vermifuge, and if
much be taken it will injure the eyesight; if a woman uses it during
the lochial discharge, it will increase her strength and improve her
complexion. One kind of this is white, and is called Sedarth, q. v.

"Sinapis Dichotoma, (Roxb. MS.) Sp. ch. dichotomous, siliques
cylindric, smooth, spreading, bark straight and tapering, leaves
stem-clasping; the lower somewhat lyred, superior ovate, lanceolate,
entire, all are smooth, as are also stem and branches." Roxb.

567 Soorunkitki.--A kind of Ketki, like the Sinobir. It has twelve
leaves or more in the flower, its scent is sweet and soft. The
plant flowers only once in 6 or 7 years; both kinds are sweet, cool,
bitter, pungent, and light, and cure disorders of mucus. The juice
of the Keora is also used for the same purpose, and mixed with it,
is cardiac. The Ketki is a variety of Keora.

568 Sirunmaki.--It is astringent, pungent, light, aphrodisiac and
cardiac; cures Juzam, swellings of the body, piles, seminal weakness,
pains in the urinary bladder, marasmus, disorders of the blood,
and dropsy; is an antidote to poisons; cures hectic fever; clears
the throat, and is an ingredient in all favorite formulæ.

569 Seroopjeea.--A kind of Jeeaphup.

570 Seriepurnie.--A kind of Arnee, also called Gumbar.

571 Seroopbudder.--A name also of Gumbar.

572 Surwalla.--The name of a common shrub.

573 Sussa.--A name for the hare. The meat is sweet, cool, and light;
induces costiveness, increases appetite, cures difficulty of breathing
and sunpat, removes dysentery, and is both a medicine and article
of diet.

574 Suffrie Amer.--The Guava, "Psidium pyriferum." Vide Anervade.

575 Segund Philla.--A kind of date.

576 Soogunass.--A name for Arloo.

577 Sillajeet, also Silladeet, Styrax or Storax; a balsam, pungent,
bitter, and stimulating, more pungent in digestion; hot, cures
seminal weakness, piles from cold, Juzam, dropsy, marasmus, difficulty
of breathing, tabes, idiotism, swellings of the body, disorders of
mucus and blood. Is vermifuge, lithontriptic, and otherwise generally
useful. It in one of the most powerful remedies; is stronger than
any other ingredient in whatever formulæ it may form a part, and it
increases the effects of all others; it is the favorite medicine of
all Indian physicians.

Sut Sillajeet is the strongest, for this means Sillajeet in a refined
state. I have found it excellent in gonorrhoea, and for thickening
the seminal fluid; also for strengthening the kidnies and urinary
bladder. The mode of preparing it, is as follows:

The Sillajeet is dissolved in water and placed in the sun in a new
earthen vessel till it becomes thick, and its color assumes a reddish
or yellowish hue; then it must be taken from the surface as much as
is clean, and preserved in another new vessel; this too is placed
in the sun, well protected from dust, till it becomes dry. This is
the Sut Sillajeet, and what remains in the first vessel is again
purified in the same manner for three different times, and each time
the pure drug is dried as above. It is easily purified by fire, and
more quickly; but this is much to be preferred. It is brought from
the hills ready prepared.


Maadentezerrubad.

"Sillajeet is the urine of the hill wild goat, which when the
animal is rutting, is discharged on the stones and evaporated by the
sun's heat. It is found in small quantities, of a black color. It
is hot in the 3rd, and dry in the 2nd degree. In the opinion of
Indian physicians, it is useful in all kinds of seminal weakness, in
swellings, in Juzam, epilepsy, diabetes, stone in the bladder, and in
gravel. The Sillajeet is often mixed with lime, but the adulteration is
discovered by the change of color. Some have said that it is the urine
of the wild ass, found as above. The purified kind is the best. In
Juzam, if ate for 40 days, it is a cure, and even in the last stages
of the disease it is beneficial. It loosens wind and phlegm."

578 Sillaruss.--Hot and moist; increases eyesight and semen, and
cures Juzam and itch. A. Myasayela.

579 Somooderphill.--A medicine of India, more black in color than
the Hurr, of a square shape, and its corners of a red color; these,
however, also become black from age; mixed with human milk and used as
a cephalic, it will cause a discharge of all phlegm from the head. If
mixed with the juice of the Gooma, it will cure hemicrania. The bark
of the root is very efficacious in swellings of the hands and feet;
and ate with salt and anise seed in warm water, it will be found
excellent in pains of the bowels.

Some have named this Hubbooneel, but how far this is correct I
know not.


Maadentezerrubad.

"Somoderphill is hot and dry; if introduced into the nose with goat's
milk or urine, it will cure head-ache, hemicrania, suppressed mucus,
&c. If mixed with goat's urine and applied to the eyes, it will cure
night blindness, and removes opacities in the cornea. Mixed with human
urine, it is both ate and applied to the nose in bites of snakes, and
with sheep's urine or buffaloe's dung is applied to the pubis in the
cure of diabetes; mixed with turmeric, it is an useful application to
the spots of white leprosy; with sugar, ate for the cure of seminal
weakness; with aniseed, in pains of the bowels; with cow's urine,
in hiccup; with dhaie, as an astringent; with ginger, in rheumatism;
with human urine, in black jaundice; with cow's urine, in mesenteric
obstructions of children; and for those who are dull of hearing,
mixed with Bhangra or honey, as an application to the inside of the
ear. In restrained or obstructed lochia, or retention of the placenta,
with asafoetida; and with cloves and sugar, in intermittent fever."

580 Somooder Phane.--Sponge.

581 Somooder Lone.--Murias Sodæ. The sea salt; it is sweet and bitter,
hot and cool, in equal degrees; tonic, anthelmintic, purgative;
promotes appetite and digestion, cures disorders of wind, and corrects
irregularities of bile and mucus.

582 Somoodersake.--Convolvulus Argenteus, also Ruttunmala.


Maadentezerrubad.

"A seed like the mustard; black and aperient, cool and moist, in the
1st degree; is aphrodisiac; strengthens the stomach, removes heat
of urine, gonorrhoea, thinness of semen, the secretion of which it
thickens and increases. It is astringent, and produces flatulence. Its
corrector is sugar; its succed. Sireyara: dose six mashas."

583 Sungtirra.--The author of the Ayeen Akberry calls it Sontirra. A
fruit of India of great esteem; it is of a yellowish red color, in
shape like the apple, but larger. Its rind is fine, soft, and smooth,
like the Sylhet orange, which it in all respects much resembles. It
is large, sweet, and acid. There are different names for the different
kinds of oranges, but this is the largest and best. It is in my opinion
cool, cardiac, drying; allays heat and thirst, and prevents the ill
effects of wind, loosens phlegm and bile, strengthens the stomach;
is very grateful when ate with sugar; and its acid is less hurtful
than many others. I have known a man of a bilious temperament, who
told me that he always found relief from the use of this orange. The
emperor was in the habit of eating it in Pilaus, when sweetened with
sugar and rose-water, and thus used, he called it Rahut Jahn. It
is thus rendered more cooling and more grateful to the taste. He
also ate it when cooled in ice, and found it useful in giving tone
to the stomach. The people of India use it with their food. If ate
after having been sprinkled with a little salt, its acid will have
less effect on the teeth, mouth, and throat; this however, can only
be necessary when unripe or not of the best kind. "Many more trivial
properties are ascribed to this orange in the original, which would
only be waste of time and paper to record."--Trans. It is said to be
hurtful in coughs, and colds.

584 Singhara.--"Trapa natuns." "Trapa Bispinosa." A common triangular
water-nut, like the hermodactyls; it is the produce of ponds or
reservoirs of water. When green and unripe, it is pleasantest to the
taste; when ripe, it becomes hard, and when dried, more so; it is
much employed in aphrodisiac formulæ. It is sweet, cool, and heavy;
cures bilious disorders, and those of blood; removes heat of the body,
restrains laxities in the bowels, and increases semen. It is generally
liked and universally eaten.

585 Sindoorie.--A name for Sudá Sohágun.

586 Sunkaholie.--A small plant, with very thin branches like common
grass; its leaves are very small; it is a creeper on the ground;
its flower white and small, and looks very beautiful in the evenings
or in moonlight nights. It is astringent, hot, and moist; aperient
and aphrodisiac; increases memory, understanding, and perception,
and likewise discrimination; cures seminal weakness, and forms an
ingredient in all favorite formulæ; cures gonorrhoea; and I have
often used the bark of its root as an aphrodisiac and for increasing
the consistence of semen. Some have called this Soorch.

587 Sunn.--"Crotalaria Juncea." A plant, the bark of which is used as
hemp; it is usually sown around cotton fields. It is of two kinds,
the second called Rasni. It is pungent and acid, and its leaves are
used as a culinary vegetable; it is cool, heavy, and astringent. Its
flower is used as an astringent in lochial discharge.

588 Sunkh.--A white shell of a very large size; cool, light;
strengthens the eye-sight, cures mucous disorders, and those of bile
and blood. A. Hulzoom. There is a small kind called Cowrie; if this
be burnt and calcined, it will quickly dry up sores by being sprinkled
over them.

589 Sebaloo.--or Sebalie, or Nindee, see N. Vitex Trifolia.

590 Sindoor.--The red oxide of lead, used externally. "Sindoora,
S." Hot; cures acne and Juzam, and disorders of poison, boils, and
eruptions; clears wounds; promotes the junction of broken bones. The
ointment of this is very excellent in sores. The receipt is to be
found in many other works.

591 Soomboolkhar.--"The white Oxide of Arsenic." It is white and like
alum in color; it ought to be chosen thus: when rubbed on a crow's
feather and put over the fire, if it does not smoke, and the feather
becomes white, it is good. A. Toorabalhalik. There are six kinds of
this, one named Sunkia, the third Godunta, the fourth Darma, the fifth
Huldia; but each will be noticed under its own proper head. The Yunani
physicians do not allow this to form a part of their prescriptions,
as they believe it destroys the vital principle; and such medicines as
are deleterious in their effects, such as opium, they always exhibit
with correctors, for this reason such remedies are seldom noticed or
used by them. The physicians of India, on the contrary, find these
drugs more effectual in many disorders than others of less power,
and such the calx of metals. For this reason too, I am in the habit
of seldom giving these remedies internally, but I usually confine
my use of them to external application, and as aphrodisiacs, which
I prescribe to a few friends, who may have derived no benefit from
Yunani prescriptions. It is better, however, to use as few of them
as possible. The sixth kind is Hurtaal.

592 Sunkia.--A kind of arsenic.

593 Sunkhal.--A species of Bindaloo.

594 Sungjerahut.--It obtains its name from being useful in
wounds. Throughout India it is also known by the name of Sungderaz. It
is a stone of very soft consistence; cool and light; beneficial in
fever, bile, asthma, pains in the chest, flatulence, and laxities
in the bowels; and when used in ointment, dries up ulcerated
parts, removes pain, and acts as an absorbent in the stomach and
bowels. I have found it by experience to be extremely useful in the
before-mentioned complaints, also in diarrhoea; in Hindostan it is
called Surkoola.

595 Sungjoothka.--A name for Jui; having a white flower.

596 Soorinjoothka.--Also a name for the above; having a yellow flower.

597 Sonamukie.--A name for Marka sheesha. "Marcasite stone."

598 Sooroon.--A kind of Baharkund, called Zemeekund. A root, resembling
a turtle, used in India as pickles; it is dressed with meat, and also
used by itself; it is dry, light, and stomachic; useful in disorders
of phlegm and piles; it produces eruptions from diffusion of bile,
and some have called it difficult of digestion. Those who are in a
reduced state, or have weak stomachs, had better not eat more than
20 direms. To my knowledge, it is much used in piles; it is said to
be beneficial in cholics and pains in the bowels. It increases bile;
and is hurtful in disorders of blood; it is also injurious to the
throat. Its correctors are fresh dhaie, and being parboiled in water
and the water changed. It may also be corrected by being boiled with
tamarind or anula leaves. Enclosed in clay and roasted in an oven,
the outer rind pulled off, it will be found less hurtful; in any
other manner it irritates the throat. If used in powder, it must
be skinned and dried in the shade; one kind of it is white inside,
and of a purple color externally. A third is white on both sides;
the former is the strongest: it is also named Soorunsona.

599 Soombullie.--Pungent and bitter, cures disorders of wind and mucus,
and is an ingredient in favorite formulæ.

600 Soos.--"The Porpus Delphinus." Its flesh is moist
and heavy, cures disorders of wind, and increases semen and
mucus. P. Khookmaié. A. Delphine. The author of the Echtyarat has
described this as a large fish of a black color, with a head like
that of the hog.

601 Suer.--See Kual.

602 Suwa.--Its flesh is cool, dry, light, and astringents; useful in
bruises; cures phlegm, cough, and hectic fever. A. Begha.

603 Soopee.--Any kind of fried pea, deprived of its shell.

604 Sona.--A precious metal; cool, heavy, and aphrodisiac; beneficial
as an antidote to poisons, and in repressing the three secretions;
used in mania, fever, and dryness; clears the complexion, and is
an ingredient in all favorite formulæ. When prepared for use, it is
called Mirganick.

605 Somph.--"Aniseed, Pimpinella Anisum." One kind of it is called
Seethka, the other Sowa; the former means the largest kind; both are
bitter, sweet, hot, and light; improves appetite; cure affections of
wind and mucus; useful in cholic, boils, eruptions, and all disorders
of the eyes, and increases bile. One kind, the latter, is used for
disorders of females. A. Razeena. P. Valanbuzury.

606 Sonth.--"Amomum Zingiber." The dried root; moist and light; sweet
during digestion, and hot; promotes appetite and digestion; allays
vomiting, cures difficulty of breathing, cough, itch, affections
of the heart, swellings of the scrotum, and swellings in general;
rheumatic pains in the joints, pains of the urinary bladder, piles,
and flatulence, and clears the voice. Pills made of Sonth are very
generally beneficial, and the result of my experience I have published
at full in my other works.

607 Sowa.--A. Shibbet. P. Wallankhoord. Hot, dry, and aperient;
its smell soporific; its leaves hurtful to the stomach. The seed
Dill. Anethum Sowa, Roxb.

608 Soonchur.--A name for the salt Soonchur, also Soonchill.

609 Soorjemooki.--A name for Adittbaqut. "Helianthus Annuus."

610 Sooderie.--Its smell is strong and penetrating, like an animal
in the rutting season; pungent and hot; beneficial in wind and fever,
and clears the voice; the black kind is used in various formulæ.

611 Soubustanee.--A name for Valanchoord.

612 Sooe Junglie.--A name for Pitpapra.

613 Soonkullie.--A shrub hurtful to animals.

614 Sowall.--A name for Thaleeb. Cool; improves the color of the skin;
cures remittents, and a little of it introduced into the parts of
both sexes, useful in gonorrhoea.

615 Soorudjjhall--A name for Lootooperie.

616 Sohora.--Cures affections of blood and mucus, and restrains
laxities of the bowels.

617 Sahunserbede.--A soft stone, of a dark-red color; cool and dry in
the second degree; used by Indian physicians in disorders of blood,
in laxatives from indigestion, acne, boils, psora, and infantile
eruptions; given with milk or butter to the quantity from two to
four soorkhs.

618 Sohunjena.--or Sahinjena, or Sajena, or Sekir. "Hyperanthera
morunga, W. Sobhanjana, S. Guilandina moringa. The root of the tree
scraped exactly resembles horse-radish, and is used as such in all
parts of India. It is a rubifacient, and useful as a stimulant." A
tree common in India; hot and light; useful in disorders of the eyes;
creates appetite; restrains diarrhoea, cures disorders of wind,
mucus, acne, and swellings of the body, affections of the spleen,
boils, and eruptions, and cleanses the blood. It is of three kinds;
the second kind, which is red, is said to be aperient and astringent;
in other properties the same. Its flower is heavy and astringent;
cures disorders of mucus, swellings of the body, and increases the
wind. The people of India use its flowers as a pickle in oil, and my
father used to recommend this pickle to those of a cold temperament,
but it is prejudicial to the eyes; it is thus prepared:

The flowers are put into water for a day, and washed; a little
mustard seed added, and the whole put into serson oil. This pickle
is less hot than the plant. Pickle made from the root, removes wind;
the leaves bruised and applied to ulcers, cleans and heals them.

619 Sahidei.--A plant about half a yard in height; its leaves like
the Toolsi, cool and moist; useful in suppressed wind, fever, pains in
the limbs, swellings of the throat; its use increases the complexion
and volume of blood. It is used for killing mercury.

620 Sohaga.--A name for Tunkhar.

621 Sembill.--"Bombax Heptaphyllum. Silk-cotton Tree." A large tree
of India; its leaves like the Jamin, but broader and more long, about
half the breadth of the peepul and twice the length; in thickness,
color, and mark, the same. Its flowers resemble the Bukaen when small,
but when more advanced, it becomes more like the goolur, and when full
grown, the flowers are as large as a large lime. It then spreads and
becomes red; after this it again closes; the flower then falls, and
leaves the seed vessel. The capsule is twice as large as that of the
Mudar, and when ripe, is filled with cotton. I have ate of the flower
when at its middle growth, and found it pleasant to the taste, but it
produces flatulence. It is cool and aphrodisiac; induces corpulence;
is astringent, and cures boils and eruptions, Juzam, and disorders
of the blood and bile: some call its gum Moocherus, the author of
the Topha for instance; but Moocherus is the gum or flower of the
Phoopul tree. In the opinion of the physicians of India, the Sembill
is a powerful medicine as an aphrodisiac. If the juice of the root
be made into sherbet with equal part of sugar, it will increase age
by restoring the vital energy, increase understanding and semen;
the larger and older the tree, and the thicker the root, the greater
its strength as a medicine. The small roots are cut into slices,
dried on a rope, and sold; in this state, it resembles Bhamun Soorkh.

Ascetics have said, that the perpendicular root of a large full
grown Sembill tree, cut in pieces, dried and reduced to a powder
is powerfully aphrodisiac, in the quantity of 4 direms daily. I
have taken this powder to the quantity of one tolah with sugar, and
have also prescribed it with advantage; it strengthens the stomach,
and is gently laxative. If given with honey, I conceive that its
virtues will be increased. The author of the celebrated work Ahmed
Ben Shirazee has told the following story, which I shall relate as
nearly as may be in his own words. "I was," says he, "on a journey,
when coming to a village in India, and being very thirsty, I met an
old man from whom I requested water to drink; I observed that this old
man had a peculiarly healthy appearance, and seemed plump and stout;
he had a young woman with him, whom he sent to his house for water,
and who brought it me to drink. I then asked him whether that young
girl was his daughter; he laughing answered that she was his wife,
and that he had three others equally young. I was somewhat surprised
at this, and asked him if this was not too many for him; he replied
no! More and more astonished, I asked him if this was really the case;
he avowed it to be so. I then questioned him how he came to be endowed
with so much strength, and how old he was; he told me that his age
was 110 years, and related the following facts: That when 50 years'
old he had already become aged and feeble, and was so much decayed in
constitution, that he seldom rose from his bed, and when he did so,
was obliged to support himself on a crutch. That a fakeer passing that
way observed his feeble state, and feeling compassion for his helpless
situation, asked him what ailed him: he replied, nothing; but that old
age had come upon him. The fakeer then gave him a medicine which he
had taken ever since, with an injunction to abstain from all acids:
this he had done, and that the effect was such as I saw. He likewise
told me that he had a son nearly 80 years of age, who had also used
the fakeer's prescription, and who was much stouter and more healthy
in every respect than he.

"Astonished at this relation, I procured the receipt, and thus hand
it down to posterity.

"Take the white roots of a full grown, healthy Sembill tree, which
is soft; cut them in pieces, dry them in the shade, and reduce them
to a powder: sift it very fine, with equal parts of sugar, and over
the fire, form it into an electuary: of this 5 direms are to be eaten
daily, and no acid to be used.

"To this the old man swore, and brought his son and introduced him to
me to prove the truth of his story. The son corroborated the assertion
of his father, and added that he had ate the remedy only two years,
when he became as he then was; certain it is, he had not a grey hair
in his head."

622 Semb.--also Séme. A common creeper; its leaves very green and
small, broad in the centre and pointed: a smaller leaf rising from
the same part of the stem; its flower is small and of a yellowish
color. Its seed is like the pistachio nut, but more broad and longer
in some degree, like the stone of the tamarind; it is called Báklá
Hindui; it is cool, astringent, flatulent, and from its astringency
strengthens the stomach; is aphrodisiac; cures bilious disorders;
increases mucus, and the Hindoos have recommended it for the cure of
wind; but in this I do not concur, as it is rather apt to produce
wind; they are however in the habit of recommending all medicines
that procure a discharge of flatus. One kind is called Golesemb,
also called Krishnphilla; its seed is larger and longer than the one
now described; it is hot, and cures disorders of wind, bile, and mucus.

623 Sehoond.--A prickly plant, growing wild. A. Zakoom. It is so
called, but the seed of the Zakoom is said to be like the Hurr,
whereas the Sehoond has no seed; it is pungent, heavy, laxative;
increases appetite, cures dropsy; is an antidote to poison, useful in
affections of the spleen, Juzam, idiotism, marasmus, and itchiness
of the bowels, flatulent swellings, badgola, swellings in general,
and is lithontriptic. The best kind is red or of a rose color; its
milk is also red, but if put on a cloth it becomes white. All kinds
of it are used in transmutation of metals. There are several kinds in
use for various purposes, the juice is an ingredient in many formulæ.

624 Sisoo or Sishum, and another kind called Rusispa. It is a very
common tree of Hindostan, large like the Jamin, and its wood is durable
and excellent; it is not readily attacked by insects nor liable to
decay. If cut down when the moon is in the wane, no insect will ever
touch it; its leaves are small and round, a little inclining to oval,
with very little point, like the leaf of the Semb. Its seed-vessel
is light, and contains only two or three seeds; it is about half an
inch long; both kinds of the tree are hot, and reduce corpulency. It
also causes abortions; cures Juzam and white leprosy; is vermifuge;
removes pains in the urinary bladder; useful in boils, eruptions, heat
of body, disorders of the blood and mucus, and allays vomiting. It is
particularly useful in disorders of the blood and cuticular eruptions;
this is a favorite wood among Europeans. It is also useful in Lues
Venerea, and is thus used: one and half masha of the filings of the
centre or dark-colored wood is boiled in 3/4 pound of water, till
only one-half shall remain, then strain and drink with the following
plain sherbet: the same quantity repeated in the evening, and every
five or six days. The sherbet of Morukub mixed or drank with it. This
must be repeated for 14, or 21, or 40 days.


Receipt for the plain Sherbet.

Filings of the wood, a pound, infused in 12 lbs. of river water,
for 24 hours, then boiled, and when half is evaporated, strain and
add to it 3 rittals of sugar (23 ounces), and preserve for use. Six
tolahs to be taken morning and evening, with the decoction above
specified. If this is required of additional strength, four tolahs
of Pitpapra is to be added when the decoction is nearly complete.


Receipt for the mixed Sherbet.

When the above sherbet is nearly ready for use, add to it Soorinjan
(Hermodactyls), Irkhir (Camel's hay), each three tolahs and 9 mashas,
separately bruised, strained, and gradually mixed; when fully boiled
add 10 tolahs of senna, and take it from the fire. If this is required
of additional virtue for the cure of foulness of the blood and Lues
Venerea, add four tolahs of the Pitpapra before the others are mixed
with it. Ten tolahs of this in the morning is to be used as before
specified. No food to be used during the cure, except kullia, pillau,
and bread; no acid to be admitted, and no greens of any description,
and the day on which the mixed sherbet is taken, even bread is not
to be eaten. "Dalbergia Sissoo. Roxb."

625 Sial "The Jackal." Its flesh strengthens the system,
increases semen, cures disorders of wind and hectic
fever. A. Ebnáávee. P. Sheghal.

626 Sendhi.--The juice of the date tree; this is less powerful than
the tarrie; it is flatulent and aperient; induces corpulency, and
is aphrodisiac.

627 Sendhæ.--A kind of Kutcherie.

628 Sealie.--The wild carrot, long and cone-shaped. A. Shakakul.

629 Seenaki.--A name for Karoonus Soombul.

630 Seenku.--A name for Shummie, vide Sh.

631 Seotie vide Kurkooja. "Rosa glandulifera. Roxb."

632 Seelidj.--A kind of Chéreela, which grows in stony places or
near water; it has a sweet smell; is bitter and cool, cures mucous
and bilious disorders, heat, thirst, vomiting, and asthmas.

633 Seep or Seepie. A name for Suduf (a shell). It is pungent, shining,
and promotes digestion and appetite, strengthens the system, and is
an antidote to poisons.

634 Saeb.--A name for Tuffah. In Yunani works, the Indian kind is
called Harara or Seoharara; it is cardiac, and its preserve is more so;
it is aphrodisiac, and produces flatulence; when unripe it is acid
and astringent, and hurtful, produces cough and decreases bile. Its
corrector is salt.

635 Seetaphill.--The common Shereefa, q. v.

636 Singia or Singia Jur, (Aconite.) A root like Gentian, but a most
deadly poison, and as such used by the Nepaulese. It is also called
Singia Khar or Beechnak. It is described in several works as a most
active poison, and not to be given by itself even in the smallest
quantity. It is made up for internal use as follows:

Take of quicksilver, Singia, Hurtaal (refined), chillies, sulphur
(purified), Peepul, fine ginger, Hurrha, (large) Anula, borax
(refined), Bahera, nutmeg, each a pice weight.

Mix the quicksilver and sulphur together with a little of the juice
of the Bhangra, then add the Hurtaal, rubbing them well, and add
all the others, with more of the juice of the Bhangra, till 10 pint
bottles or five seers shall be expended; this and these must be rubbed
continually during 12 days, and till it acquires the consistence of a
mass proper for pills. It is then to be made up into small pills of
the size of a small pea each. These are given one for a dose, with
the following vehicles, and in the cure of the following disorders;
and during their exhibition, only simple food, and no acid to be used.


  With Kutkuleja leaves, in                   Vomiting, Cholera, &c.
   ,,  Cow's urine, in the cure of            Diarrhoea.
   ,,  Toolsi leaves,                         Internal heat.
   ,,  Lime juice, and applied to the eyes,   Evil spirits depart.
   ,,  Kusskuss water, in the cure of         Bilious disorders.
   ,,  Tirphilla and ginger, in               Asthma.
   ,,  Seed of Methi infusion,                Dysentery.
   ,,  Honey,                                 Emaciation.
   ,,  Ditto, to thicken                      Semen.
   ,,  Butch, in the cure of                  Tooth-ache.
   ,,  Pounded Kusskuss,                      Dropsy.
   ,,  Nutmeg,                                Rheumatism from wind.
   ,,  Onion Juice,                           Bites of snakes.
   ,,  Infus. of Adjwain,                     Thirst.
   ,,  [1]Juice of Kussownda,                 Wind.
   ,,  Radish juice,                          Offensive breath.
   ,,  [1]Soopearie juice, (rubbed,)          Cholicks of children.
   ,,  Gopie earth,                           Strangury.
   ,,  Cow's Ghee,                            Bites of snakes.
   ,,  Root of Semel tree,                    Every thing.
   ,,  Old Goor,                              Internal heat.
   ,,  [1]Eleachee, (Guzerathee,)             Intermittents.
   ,,  Mugrela and salt,                      Indigestion.
   ,,  Doob grass,                            Diarrhoea.
   ,,  Mace, externally in                    Night blindness.
   ,,  Goonchee, in the cure of               General Rheumatism.
   ,,  Pith of Bela,                          Vertigo.
   ,,  Water of burnt wheat,                  Sunpat.


637 Shaldan.--A kind of rice, in virtue like the Saatie.

638 Shalook.--The root of the Kawul flower, q. v.

639 Shubbe.--Polyanthes Tuberosa. The name of a common flower, which
has a strong scent in the night; it is of several kinds, white,
yellow, red, and yellowish red. It is hot and dry in the second
degree; three direms taken in water, is diuretic, and also useful
in suppression of the menses. It expedites the delivery of the dead
foetus and of the placenta. Its smell expels mucus from the brain
and collections of wind. In those of a hot temperament it produces
head-ache. Its corrector is oil of roses, vinegar, or its own oil;
the latter is very beneficial both externally and internally used, and
possesses all the beneficial properties attributed to the flower. An
unguent composed of this, Akirkirrha, and Tokhur Unjeera, applied to
the loins, is very beneficial in the two cases mentioned above, and
is used both externally and internally in complaints of the uterus,
also in rheumatism.

640 Shutawur.--A name for the root of a tree in the jungles, of a
prickly kind; its stem and branches are thin, with many smaller ones,
about an inch or two inches long in the intervals. Its leaves are very
thin and small, somewhat like the Fir tree. The tree itself grows to
the height of 9 or 10 feet; its seed resembles the Anboo Saleb. It is
sweet, cool, moist, and heavy; cures disorders of wind, mucus, bile,
and blood, also swellings of the body. It is aphrodisiac; increases
the secretion of milk, and is an ingredient in celebrated formulæ. For
increasing the consistence of semen, and as an aphrodisiac, I have
found its conserve and powder of great use. One kind of it is called
Kalinta, another Maha Shutawuri; they are cool; cure piles and laxities
from indigested food, disorders of the eyes; are cardiac, aphrodisiac,
and increase knowledge.

641 Shitawuballie.--A kind of sugar, which cures eruptions from
diffused bile, seminal weakness, delirium, nausea, and thirst.

642 Shereefa.--Called also Seetaphill. It is sweet and cardiac;
increases semen and removes depression of spirits. If the kernel of the
seed, in the quantity of one direm, and dhaie, half rittal, be bruised
together and rubbed over the body, in cures of itch, left to dry, and
the same repeated several times, the itch will be cured; this I have
found to be the case; tried and found effectual. "Annona squamosa."

643 Shuftaloo.--A common fruit of India. Its tree like the Aroo. It
is heavy, slow of digestion, cool, but less so than the Aroo; when
unripe it is sour. The best is sweet when ripe.

644 Shukur Javan.--Cool; expels wind; strengthens the system; decreases
bile, wind, and mucus. A. Toorunjabeen.

645 Shukur Kund.--"Convolvulus Batatas." A common culinary root,
sweet and a little hot, and heavy, aphrodisiac, increases semen,
and strengthens the brain.

646 Shumie.--Commonly called Seenkur; cool, light, and soft; cures
difficulty of respiration, Juzam, piles, disorders of mucus. The
dried fruit increases knowledge, causes bile, and the growth of hair.

647 Shunphopee.--A kind of Baer; is emetic, and beneficial in disorders
of mucus and bile.

648 Shungirf.--The red sulphuret of mercury. A. Shingerf; sweet and
bitter; useful in fever and mucus, also fever from excess of mucus,
wind and bile. It is called also Ingoor.

649 Sholie.--A name for wild turmeric; pungent, sweet, and bitter;
increases appetite, but vitiates taste.

650 Shora.--Nitras Potassæ. Nitrate of Potash. Yavakshara,
S. A. Ubkur. Aperient; increases bile. In the Dhara Shekoi, it is said,
that one dram of Shora, of the refined sort, pounded and enclosed in
two plantains for a night, and given in affections of the spleen and
Badgola, and repeated for three or four days, will cure the disease. If
bruised and applied to piles, it will remove them. As a refrigerant and
diuretic in gonorrhoea, I have found it very beneficial. It has been
given in suppression of urine to the Emperor Akber, with great success.

651 Shetoot.--A name for the mulberry.

652 Shehut.--Also Shehud. A. Assil, "Honey." Vide Yunani works.

653 Sheeta.--A kind of Doob grass.

654 Sheesha.--Resembling Kaley in properties. A. Asserab.

655 Sheeshum.--Also Seeshum.

656 Sheobogun.--A name for Bael, from the word Mahadeo, who is called
"Sheo," and Bogun, which signifies "ornament."

657 Abbasie.--"Mirabilis Jalappa, W. Gul Abbas, H. The root is a
mild and efficient purgative, equal, if not superior, to the common
jalap." A very common shrub, used by Dr. McNabb, as a purgative;
its flower is of a red color and very beautiful, and there are some
yellow and white, and variegated; it grows about a yard high or even
more; its leaves are triangular, and about two inches long. A pickle
is made from the root, and the flower is dressed and eaten with
meat. The leaves are suppurating. It is generally understood that
the root, when old, is the Choobcheenee, but this is not the case,
though it resembles it, or that kind called Kutai.

658 Ghoghaie.--A bird called in A. Asphoor. It resembles the
turtle-dove, and derives its name from the great noise it makes. It
is also called Pukherie, but this is a general name for wild fowl.

659 Gowreh.--All kinds of green fruit.

660 Ghafis.--Hemp; Agrimony; deobstruent; dose one miskal.

661 Ghar.--The laurel; discutient and attenuant; dose half miskal.

662 Ghasool.--Glasswort; Hindooi, Chook; P. Ghasul; hot and dry;
detergent and caustic; dose half direm.

663 Ghareekoon.--Agaric; deobstruent, vermifuge, cathartic; dose one
or two danas.

664 Ghirb.--The mountain pine, drying.

665 Kakjunga.--Cool, but some say hot, and dry in the 2nd degree; it
is vermifuge, and useful in an over-loaded stomach, in poisons, mucus,
and eruptions from suffusion of bile; also in fevers. It also obtains
the name of Misie. Rijel ul Ghorab, A. Tokhem Khelal Kheleel, P.

666 Kans.--A shrub with a white flower, of a downy kind; cures
suppression of urine or dysuria, heat of the body, disorders of blood,
bile, and hectic fever.

667 Kakolie.--Its properties resemble Jirkakolie.

668 Kaksaag.--Aperient, and promotes appetite; cures disorders of
mucus, swellings of the body, and expels wind.

669 Kasmerie or Kasmuroo, or Kasmurga, or Kasheera. It is hot; heavy;
cures fever, pains in the bowels, and its flower is astringent and
beneficial in eruptions from diffusion of bile. It is an ingredient
in many formulæ. It prevents the approach of old age, strengthens
all the animal functions, and is aphrodisiac and diuretic.

670 Kanjee.--Increases the secretion of milk; cures disorders of
mucus, wind, and bile. It is the vinegar of Hindostan. It restores
prostrated strength from fatigue, removes pains in the bowels and
flatulence, and remedies costiveness. The method of preparing it is
thus. A little Zeera and Saslie are put on the fire till they produce
a smoke, an earthen vessel is then placed over them in an inverted
position to receive the smoke. Then into this is put mustard, salt,
adjwain, and cumin seed, with warm water; the mouth of the vessel
is then tied up in a cloth, and placed in the sun till it becomes
sour. In the hot-weather it is quickly prepared; the older it is,
the better for medicinal purposes.

671 Gowrohun.--A medicine found in the gall-bladder of a cow,
and is but seldom met with. It is beneficial in affections of the
mesenteric glands of children; in the quantity of two soorkhi it is
purgative. It is also beneficial in flatulent swellings. If boiled
in water and used for some time, it will cure epilepsy. It is only
found in those cows the descendants of those herded by Khrishna.

It is often counterfeited, but the real kind is clearer than the
spurious.

672 Kath.--"Acacia Catechu, W. Kayar, H. Khadira, S. Mimosa Catechu,
Woodville." Called also Kuth. It is cool and vermifuge; strengthens
the teeth; cures seminal weakness, fever, white leprosy, swellings,
eruptions from bile, marasmus, Juzam, and mucous disorders. The gum
is sweet and aphrodisiac, and strengthens the system. That made from
the pith of the Khaer, is useful in boils and eruptions, affections of
the mouth, and disorders of mucus and blood. It also removes ptyalism.

673 Kakra Singie.--It is crooked like a ram's horn; small and red,
with a tinge of black, and its pod is hollow; it is bitter, astringent,
hot, and promotes appetite, and restores the color of the skin changed
from foulness of blood; allays vomiting and thirst; cures fever and
disorders of mucus, difficulty of breathing, cough, and eructation,
also piles and dysentery. It is said to be hot and dry in the 2nd
degree. It likewise cures wind and hoarseness, and creates appetite;
and it is useful, if retained in the mouth, as a relief to cough from
phlegm; a little of it given to children at the breast, mixed with
honey, increases their strength and removes emaciation.

674 Kanakutchoo.--Brought from Cashmere, and held in great esteem in
that country. Its taste is saltish and sweet, and it is used dressed
with meat; some call it Samaroogh, but the latter is a creeper and
does not produce seed. The fruit is about half the size of an egg,
and is suspended from the plant, which is of a white color, and grows
during the rains in the jungles, and loves the vicinity of running
water. It is also called Neerkoombie. It is found sometimes amongst
ruins, but those that grow in the jungles are to be preferred. The
lower classes of Indians use it as food, and as such it is grateful. It
is useful in affections of the eyes.

675 Kagphill or Kagtoondie. "Strychnos Nux Vomica, W." "I have heard
that it grows very common about Midnapoor or Cuttack; several seeds
or nuts are enclosed in one pod, which in size is about that of a
horse chestnut, the seeds are surrounded in the pod by a glutinous
matter. It is said to be useful in paralysis, but has seldom been given
beyond six grains in the day."--"Trans." It has obtained its name from
being poison to the crow. Kag being the name of a crow, and phill, a
nut A. Hubbool Girab; for the same reason. It is not well ascertained
whether it is a seed or root, but it looks like a seed. It is equally
uncertain whether it is cool or hot; it is brownish, inside white; it
is round, and its shell very hard; steeped in water it becomes soft,
and its shell can be removed; it is then rasped down and pounded,
and kept in a state of powder or electuary for use. It strengthens
the system; cures disorders of wind; blackens white hair; but its
constant use produces palsy. It is an active poison; its correctors
are drinking fresh milk, producing vomiting, and taking soup, oily or
fatty substances. If externally applied to discolorations of the skin,
daad, pains, &c. it will be found beneficial. It is said in the Dara
Shekoi, to be excellent in cholics from wind. It is in my opinion hot,
but as it is a strong poison, it is better not to use it: if given
as a medicine, its correctors ought to be given with it.

It is also mentioned among aphrodisiac medicines, and will be found
a powerful one, should it agree with the stomach. In India its name
is Koochela.

676 Gajur.--"Daucus Carota, W." The carrot; sweet to the taste, and
equally hot and cold in its effects; it creates appetite, produces
costiveness, cures eruptions from suffusion of bile; is useful in
piles, is lithontriptic, and beneficial in mucous disorders and
wind. A. Gazur. I have found it excellent when roasted in an oven;
the thin external rind and heart removed, and ate with rose-water,
and Bedemoosk, in depression of spirits, and as a cardiac. Its
distilled water is also equally effectual. Its virtues are described
in Yunani works.

677 Kaiphill or Kutphill. It is bitter, astringent, and pungent,
cures disorders of mucus and wind, fevers, difficulty of breathing,
seminal weakness, piles, cough, and all affections of the throat.

678 Kanch or Kaatch; light; reduces corpulence; cures boils and
eruptions, and strengthens the eyes. It is also called Zejage.

679 Kalizeerie.--"Nigella Indica, Roxb. Musavi, S. Sp. ch. annual,
petals entire, pistils five, length of the stamina, leaves decompound,
exterior lip of the nectary ovate, and deeply two-cleft, interior
entire and acute. Roxb. MS." A seed of a black color, twice as long as
the zeerie, and about twice the breadth; also named Kurdmana though
improperly. It is used as medicine for horses; it is hot, increases
the digestive powers, and is useful in all swellings.

680 Kasht.--Very hard. A kind of sugar-cane.

681 Kangeerug.--A name for Kakeerun.

682 Kalseenbie.--A name for Kalyseeb; hot and heavy; cures disorders
of mucus and bile, also disorders in the mouth.

683 Kansi.--P. Rooie; heavy, hot, and aperient; strengthens the eyes
and cures bilious and mucous disorders.

684 Kathmanda.--A name for Lisanus sowr.

685 Kalakora.--A name for Kirra Inderjow.

686 Katchloon.--A name for Muschookoonia, also named Kuphaiena, or
Mylhoolrejaje. Its taste is rough; increases bile, decreases mucus,
and useful in splenitis. It is laxative, removes specs, and opacities
of the cornea. It dries the stomach, and externally is useful in all
kinds of itch.

687 Kastipadile.--Vide Padill.

688 Kalesur or Kulesur; a plant, its leaves and sprigs very thin and
small, it is sold in a dried state. It is like the Badsingbose. Its
fruit is like the Baer, but a little larger, of a clay color or
greenish. It is of two kinds, white and black, both oleaginous and
sweet, heavy, increases semen, cures disorders of the three secretions,
fevers, disorders of the vagina, dropsy, and it is astringent in its
properties. The black kind increases appetite.

689 Kanghi.--Cool, pungent; sweetish to the taste; strengthens the
system, clears the color of the skin; is astringent, flatulent;
useful in affections of the mouth and hectic fever.

690 Kandagolhi.--A kind of onion, used by the weavers of cloth, from
which circumstance it has derived its name ("Squills?"). It is like
the common onion, but four times as large; it grows in the jungles, and
in A. is called Unsul; its properties are described in Yunani works.

691 Kapoor.--Cool, light, anti-aphrodisiac; beneficial in disorders of
the eyes; cures heat of the body, bad taste in the mouth; removes
corpulence and swellings of the body, disorders from poison,
and clears the brain. A. Kaphoor. It is of four kinds: Poonasir,
Bheemseejnie, Saasdaie and Bhaskur, the medicinal properties of all
are the same. "Laurus Camphora."

692 Kupoor.--The same as above; also called Khesia.

693 Kapoorbile.--A flower; its leaves and root resembling the saffron
flower; it is brought from Europe.

694 Goobrowla also Goobreyla. A. Khumfusa. P. Jaab. It is described
in all Yunani works.

695 Kapithar Jug.--A kind of Soorinjan; pungent, cool, and dry;
increases general heat and bile; cures disorders of blood and mucus;
also removes daad; is vermifuge, and is an antidote to poison.

696 Kupass or Kurpass. "Gossypium herbaceum." It is sweet, hot, and
light; cures disorders of wind; it is the cotton tree; some call it
cool. Its seed increases the secretion of animal milk, removes bile,
mucus, heat, thirst, fatigue, epilepsy, &c. The wild species is cool,
and increases the acuteness of taste and cures ulcers. It is also
called Karis or Karpassie.


Maadentezerrubad.

Kupass is the cotton tree; hot and moist; cures asthma, cough,
costiveness; loosens the chest. The cotton burnt and applied to ulcers,
dries them up, blown into the nose stops bleeding; also bleeding of
the gums. Should any one have eaten dhatura, and become insensible,
four direms of the seeds bruised in water, and given to drink will
remove the cause. It is also an antidote to the poison of opium,
bhang, snakes, the root of dhatura, scorpions, &c. in the quantity
of seven direms.

697 Kubab Cheenee.--It is pungent and bitter; promotes digestion;
increases appetite; improves the taste; cures affections of wind,
phlegm, paralysis of the tongue, and clears the voice. "Cubebs,
Piper Cubeba, Murr." Excellent in gonorrhoea virulenta.

698 Kapoor Kutcherie.--A name for Saaltie.

699 Kapoorie.--A name for Ispurka.

700 Kuthael.--"Artocarpus Integrifolia (Roxb.)" A fruit of India,
very common, of a green color like Shukena, from half a yard to a
yard in length, and about half a yard in thickness. On opening it is
found a pulp of a saffron color, of a mucilaginous nature, inclining
to gummy. The tree is like that of the walnut, but I suspect the
Kuthael is much the largest and the leaves much less. The smell of the
flower is sweet. The fruit is taken from the tree before it is ripe,
covered with lime and thus brought to maturity. It cures disorders of
bile and wind, strengthens the system, and is aphrodisiac; it cures
eruptions from diffused bile, and is slow of digestion; it induces
costiveness, is useful in disorders of the chest, increases semen and
allays thirst. Its seeds are astringent and sweet, and increase wind,
they are hurtful if ate on an empty stomach. Its corrector is its
seed. Some have said, that the fruit when allowed to ripen on the
tree is the best, and that the forced kind is cool.

701 Kootki.--A small root, "Justicia Ganderussa," brought from the
hills; it is of a grey colour and full of knots; bitter to the taste,
during digestion; pungent, cool, and drying. It is light and aperient;
cures bilious, mucous, and feverish disorders, difficulty of breathing,
heart-burn, and heat of body. It is also vermifuge; the dose 4 direms.

702 Kutara.--A kind of sugar-cane; it is thin, cool, and heavy;
cures diffusion of bile and Rajiroge. The leaves of one kind are
like needles, another much larger, a third of a middling size:
all are astringent, and after meals produce heart-burn, and wind;
they cure disorders of mucus and bile, but cause heat in the chest
and flatulence. Its correction is being boiled in water, or roasted
in hot ashes. When washed in water it becomes less flatulent, and
cures disordered secretions, increases the bulk of the solids, and
is diuretic.

703 Kuteera.--"Echinops echinatus, (Roxb.)" The globe-thistle,
or Kuragond. Cool; increases consistence of semen; beneficial in
gonorrhoea; lessens aphrodisia. If two mashas be infused in water for
a night, well mixed and taken with sherbet of Unjewar, or by itself,
it will be found effectual in vomiting of blood, in gonorrhoea,
and itchiness of the urinary bladder.

704 Kutai.--The white kind; it is a species of the small Kutai; the
flower of the large kind is red. The small is bitter and pungent;
hot and useful in wind, bile and disorders of the liver, difficulty
of voiding urine, in torpor of the olfactory nerves; is vermifuge,
and cures affections of the heart. The large kind is called Beretta,
already noticed, also called Kuntai.

705 Kutoonbur.--"Cucumis Madraspatanas." A kind of Kutchim (species
of melon); sweet and hot, vide Baluka.

706 Kutputrie.--Hot and astringent; useful in disorders of the
organs of generation of the female; its fruit cool and aphrodisiac,
and produces a discharge of wind.

707 Kuth.--"Catechu, Terra Japonica, Acacia Catechu?"

708 Kutchnar.--"Bauhinia variegata." One kind of which is called
Gobdar; the leaves of the Kutchnar are green and variegated with veins,
and they resemble the junction of two leaves, indeed a separation does
sometimes exist. The tree resembles the mulberry, and is even larger,
but considerably so in diameter; both kinds are cool, astringent;
produce costiveness; cure disorders of mucus and bile; are vermifuge;
destroy worms in the rectum; useful in the virulent ulcer called
Kunzeer, also in all eruptions and boils. Its flower is cool, dry,
light, and astringent; cures disorders of bile, and corrects an excess
in the menstrual discharge; beneficial in piles, wounds, ulcers,
and cough. The tree is called by the above name, but it is usually
given to the flower only. I have found it beneficial to the stomach, in
removing laxativeness of the bowels, and in bleeding piles. A decoction
of its bark forms an excellent gargle in ptyalism from mercury or bela.

709 Kutchaloo.--"Arum Colocasia." An esculent root, vide Aroie.

710 Gudjpepullie.--Also Gudjpeepul; a round fruit, 4 times as large
as that of the peepul, and very much resembles it; it is bitter,
hot; increases appetite; induces costiveness; cures Juzam, difficulty
of breathing, affections of the throat, is vermifuge, and useful in
disorders of wind and mucus.

711 Kutchua.--"P. Sungpoosht or Bahá. A. Silhafat." "The Turtle." Its
meat is moist and aphrodisiac, and is useful in disorders of wind. It
is related, that in cases of great difficulty of respiration from
affections of the lungs or bronchiæ, much benefit has been derived
from inhaling the breath of the turtle. Its eggs, mixed with water
and applied hot to the scrotum, removes disorders, to which it may
be subjected.

712 Coochilla.--Vide Kagphill.

713 Kutcherie.--(Cucumis Madraspatanas;) sweet, hot, light, and
soft; creates appetite; increases bile. It is called Dustumboieya,
vide Phoot. There is another fruit which bears this name, it is a
creeper, found in fields, like the Kunoorie fruit; it is pungent,
bitter; assists digestion, and increases appetite. In my opinion,
it is hot; it is eaten cut in half, and fried with salt and oil,
and greatly relished. It is thus also rendered more active in its
properties. It is used both ripe and unripe; when used with meat,
the later is easily rendered tender. It forms an ingredient in all
stomachic powders in India.

714 Kutchoor.--"Curcuma Zerumbet, (Roxb.)" Of three kinds: large, male,
and female. The large kind is also called Nerkuchoor, and the simple
word Kutchoor is generally applied to the female; the third kind is
called Kaphoor Kutcherie. The Nerkutchoor is also called Zerambeed. The
three kinds possess nearly the same properties. It is hot, light;
creates appetite; cures Juzam, piles, boils, wounds, difficulty of
breathing, Badgola, disorders of wind, and mucus, and is vermifuge.

715 Kudum.--"Nauclea Orientalis, or Kudum, and another kind called
Mohoonut; also one kind named Dhoul Kudum, and Bhoom Kudum." The
leaves and flower resemble the walnut tree; all kinds are cool,
and are useful in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood.

716 Gudha.--Its flesh is sweet, during digestion bitter. It is light,
strengthens the system, and increases bile and mucus.

717 Gudloon.--Hot, light; cures disorders of wind and mucus. Is
aperient and diuretic.

718 Goodhul Citron.--Has a flower like the poppy, and many leaves;
its leaves are like the mulberry, and it flowers every alternate
year. Its fruit is like the apple; when unripe, green, and acid, with
a little bitterness; but when fully ripe, and it has become yellow,
the bitterness does not remain; it also becomes red and sweet, but
if it remain long on the tree it again assumes a greenish hue. The
tree is like the lime tree with broad leaves. The people of India
have an idea, that if the flowers be kept in the house they produce
quarrelling and strife; the flowers are used in lowness of spirits
arising from heat. It is said, that the root of this and also that of
the Kunaer are very intoxicating. If boiled in milk, and this curdled,
it is aphrodisiac.

719 Kurna.--The flower of the above; it has four leaves, and is white
before it opens; it is shaped like an arrow-head; it has a sweet
perfume, and as such is used; a distilled water is also made from
it and an essential oil. The water is called Arukbahar, and is hot
and dry, and used in weakness of the brain; also as an aphrodisiac;
creating appetite and elevating the spirits; also in pains of the
chest, in cholics from wind, and delirium.

A little of it commenced with and constantly used for seven days,
with a little sugar, is beneficial in affections of the spleen;
it is used in Aniseed water as a lithontriptic; in an empty stomach
for the bleeding piles. It is used with musk, &c. to perfume hooka
snakes. The author of the Topha says, that this is the bud of the
Naringi, and that the distilled water of that is called Arukbahar;
but in my opinion they are distinct varieties, and in this part of
the country they distil from all. Goodhul is the name of the tree,
Kuth that of the fruit, and Kurna that of the flower.

720 Karownda.--Also Kirmidie, and a kind of this Khristnphill; the
first kind is red and white, second is white and black, and the third
entirely black, therefore called Kristnphil, from being of the color
of the god Kristna. Its flower is like the Jui; when unripe it is hot,
heavy, and acid; produces mucus and diffusion of bile: when ripe it
is sweet and less acid, light; creates appetite, and cures disorders
of wind and bile. "Carissa Carandas."

721 Kareyl.--"Capparis, the Caper plant," or Kareyr. A tree without
leaves, its branches rise from the root, and are very numerous. It
grows about the height of the Baer. It has numerous flowers, small and
three-leaved. Its flowers are boiled and eaten; its fruit made into
pickles in salt-water and oil; its fruit is at first green, then it
becomes red, and lastly black; they are about the size of the Karownda;
they are bitter, pungent, hot, aperient; useful in mucous disorders,
wind, boils, eruptions, swellings, as an antidote to poisons, and in
piles. Its flowers are beneficial in disorders of mucus and bile. My
father always recommended them in disorders arising from cold. In
consequence of their heating quality, they are useful in affections
of the joints. P. Amghyllyan.

722 Karunj.--From the "Moojerrabad Akberi." The name of a large
tree, the leaves like the lime tree, the fruit like the tamarind,
but smaller; it is hot, and discusses swellings and all pains arising
from cold; useful in lumbago, in strokes of the wind, and it is used
as a fomentation in the above disorders.

723 Gurehri.--A fruit of India, produced in the hot season; it is
a nut of a black color, and shining appearance, about the length
of the Jamalgota, but a little thinner; the kernel is white, and is
ate with salt and peepul, and much esteemed. It induces costiveness,
is aphrodisiac, and thickens semen.

724 Krishndaan.--A kind of rice; in its properties and excellence
like the Saatie.

725 Kurwanuk.--The name of a common bird; its meat is sweet and
pleasant to the taste. It frequents the banks of rivers and jungles,
but the river kind is nearly twice the size of the other.

726 Geerguth.--(Chameleon.) A. Heerbah, Un. Kalamunder,
P. Aftabperust. It resembles the lizard in its appearance. It has a
long tail, and frequently changes its color.

727 Kurkura.--(Ardea Virgo.) A species of paddy-bird, called also
Kurkhuraa; its flesh increases corpulency; is aphrodisiac, and
strengthens the system.

728 Kurinjua or Korinjeka, or Kurinjee. "Guilandina Bonduccella,
Linn. Cæsalpinia Bonduccella. Roxb. Kutkuleja, H. An excellent tonic,
and infallible in the cure of intermittents, when combined with a
decoction of Chereyta. Dose one seed, mixed with pepper, which may be
repeated every three hours." A seed, or rather nut, hard and shining;
it is of a blue or greenish color; light, round, and thick, like the
Majoo; when shaken near the ear the kernel is found loose, and when
broken, this is found whitish, like the Mukhana. Its shrub grows to
the height of a man, more or less, "but if supported, will run much
higher. It is covered with very sharp prickles, and makes the best
fence in the world perhaps." It is hot; cures piles; is vermifuge,
useful in Juzam, and its leaves are beneficial in disorders of wind,
mucus, and blood. A. Ektumkut. P. Khayeblees. Leaves used as a
fomentation in rheumatic pains.

729 Kurwara or Kurwala. A name for Amultas;
P. Phuloos. A. Khiarshimber. Discutient, aperient, and laxative. See
Yunani works.

730 Korund.--A name for Sunadudje.

731 Goor.--It is sweet to the taste and a little pungent; light,
aperient; creates appetite; increases bile and swellings of the body;
produces worms and cures disorders of wind; strengthens the system;
is diuretic and cardiac. P. Kund Sia.

732 Kurr.--"Carthamus Tinctoria." A name of Masphir or
Kussumb. P. Kussukdana. A. Koortub. It is of a white color like
peas, and a little pointed; it is very common; removes phlegm, and
is aperient.

733 Karela.--"Momordica Charantia." A common culinary fruit, of a
green or yellowish color, and encloses numerous seeds. It is about
two or three inches long, and very irregular in the surface. It is
in its properties cool and light; some say hot and heavy, and some
call it equal. It is pungent and laxative; beneficial in piles,
eruptions of the mouth, disorders of the blood, jaundice, panroque,
phlegm, seminal weakness, and it is vermifuge. Its name is said to
be Kassaul hemar. In my opinion it is very drying, by reason of its
heating quality: when dressed with onions, it is less heavy as food. It
has the effect of strengthening the stomach weakened from cold. Its
root taken, commencing with one masha and increasing to seven, will
cure the venereal disease. The wild kind is named Kaarbellie. It is
cool, bitter, light, and aperient; cures disorders of bile, blood,
phlegm, black bile, jaundice, wind, marasmus, seminal weakness,
and worms. Another kind of this produced in gardens is of a white
color, and more long than the other; its coat is thin, and it is
the best of all the varieties: there are many ways of dressing it,
but with onions it is the best and most aphrodisiac; without onions,
its effects are not so powerful, and it is less heating.

734 Kirkund.--The small Baer, called also Nazookbadun; it is moist
and heavy; sweet, and cures disorders of bile and wind. It is also
called Jhirberrie. There is a smaller kind, that is more sweet,
and grows in gardens.

735 Kora.--A name for the Inderjow tree; it is very bitter and
astringent; cool and dry; creates appetite; cures bilious disorders and
foulness of blood, also disorders of mucus; and removes obstructions
in the pylorus from viscid mucus; useful in indigestion and Juzam;
restrains hemorrhage from piles and diarrhoea.

736 Kurni.--"Mimusops Kauki." A fruit of the hills; pungently
bitter and hot; cures disorders of bile and mucus, flatulence, and
is vermifuge.

737 Kurrukphill.--A name for Bahira.

738 Krishn Moolie.--A black kind called Kalesur; it derives its name
from being a root of the color of Krishna.

739 Krishn Saarba.--A black kind of Saarba.

740 Kussowndie or Kussownda. The name of a tree of India; its branches
commence from near the root and surround the stem, growing out from all
sides of it. It grows about the thickness of a bambu, and in height
that of a man. The leaves if rubbed have a disagreeable smell. Its
seed-vessel is about a yard long, or even longer; it encloses small
round seeds like Sumach, a little crooked. Its leaves are thick like
Kumerach, but the latter are broad, whereas this is longer. The large
kind is called Kussownda, the smaller Kussowndie; the leaves of both
are nearly alike. It is hot, moist, and some say equal. It relieves the
brain, and if the seed is washed and eaten, it will cure the effects
of the scorpion's poison; and if the seed and leaves be ground in a
mill, made into bread with flour, and eaten with sweet oil, it will
cure night blindness; should any one have swallowed tiger's hair,
pills made of the leaves, flower, and seed swallowed and vomiting
produced, the hair will be discharged.


Maadentezerrubad.

Kussowndie is a medicine of India, hot and dry; cures wind and loosens
phlegm; useful in cough and disorders of the blood. 1 1/2 direms
of its root with half direm of peepul eaten, will cure the poison of
snakes or scorpions, or if rubbed on the bitten or stung part will give
relief. It clears the voice, and if five direms of its leaves with one
direm of peepul be bruised in water, and taken for seven days, during
which period food without salt is eaten, it will cure Lues Venerea.

741 Kusseroo or Kusseruk. "Cyperus Tuberosus." The root of a grass,
black and full of hair, like bristles, found in the cold season. It
is cool, sweet, heavy; used in disorders of bile, blood, and general
heat; it induces costiveness, increases semen, phlegm, and wind, and
allays thirst. If eaten with its outer rind, or only chewed, and the
juice swallowed, it will be less heavy and hurtful; some bruise it
and drink sherbet thus made with sugar, and it is thus more cooling
and useful in cases of gonorrhoea, and the effects of hot winds,
but in this case the outer rind must be removed.

742 Kustooryea Mirg.--Its meat is sweet to the taste, light and
flatulent, creating appetite; that of the female is cool: useful in
fever, cough, disorders of blood, and difficulty of breathing. It
is said to be common in Thibet and Bengal. It resembles the deer,
and has two ridges on its back lengthways. Musk is procured from
its abdomen in this manner: When it is ripe, it produces itching
about the navel, and the animal rubbing it on sharp pointed stones,
causes it to discharge in the form of matter. This is the finest and
best kind of musk, and the gentleman, with whom I was, received some
of it every two years, from the Rajah of Shirinaghur.

743 Kussoombh.--A. Masphir. "Artemisia Abrotanum." It is sweet, and
very hot, and dry; light, and increases bile; cures disorders of blood,
mucus, and suppression of urine.

744 Kustoorie.--Bitter, hot, heavy, aphrodisiac; useful in colds,
disorders of phlegm and wind; allays vomiting; removes swellings;
corrects offensive breath and loss of smell. One kind of it is called
Lutta Kustoorie, vide L.

745 Kussees.--"Sulphas Ferri." A kind of Zaaj; astringent, cool;
increases eye-sight, and clears the skin; vermifuge and an antidote
to poisons; also a kind called Heera Roopus.

746 Kukrownela.--The Kurrownda.

747 Kukora.--The fruit of a shrub of India, smaller than the Kurela;
it has many hair-like fibres of a green colour over its surface, and
it has numerous seeds. Its properties are the same as the Kurela. It
is useful in that eruption which takes place on the face in puberty;
beneficial in fever and phlegm, and creates appetite. One kind of
it is called Banje Kakora. It is bitter, an antidote to poisons;
useful in that eruption of the face called acne punctata. Its root
is used in Zaerbad, in discussing swellings, and in the bites of all
noxious reptiles, and it is also of benefit in cough. Some have said,
that this is the wild Kurela, but this is not the fact, for the wild
Kurela is essentially different and more resembles the garden sort.

748 Kookra.--"Wild fowl." P. Deek. It is hot, moist, heavy,
aphrodisiac; used in disorders of wind; is tonic; produces semen and
increases mucus. Its flesh is astringent to the taste; dry and heavy;
and those found near rivers are hot and aphrodisiac, and increase
mucus.

749 Kookrie.--The female of the above. A. Dejaje: the properties
the same.

750 Kukrie.--"Cucumis Utilissimus." Unripe, it is sweet and cool,
heavy, cardiac, and astringent. In my opinion it is aperient, creates
appetite, and removes bilious disorders.

751 Gugundool.--The best kind of this is the Kumbi; it is eaten wasted
in ghee, with salt and condiments.

752 Googeerun or Gugeeroo. A plant from 1 to 1 1/2 yards high; the
branches very thin, the leaves like the Nirkut; it is purgative, and
when ripe, it is heavy; recommended in wind, blood, and affections
of mouth.

753 Kukrownda.--The common Kurrownda. The plant is half a yard or
more in height, its leaves like the tobacco; but smaller. It has an
offensive smell, much increased by being rubbed betwixt the finger;
it grows near ruins or in waste places, and is found in the rains. It
is a kind of Bhangra, and has the name of Kokurbangra; it is bitter,
pungent; useful in fevers and disorders of the blood and mucus. If
bruised in water, and the water given as a clyster to children, it
will remove ascarides, and if three drops be dropped into each ear,
it will cure intermittents. It is very beneficial in bleeding piles,
both internally and externally. If one direm of the leaves be taken
in water, and the bruised leaves applied to the piles, it will effect
a cure.

754 Gillo.--"Menispermum Glabrum," (vide Goorcha,) or Vaoutvellee or
Imrutlutta, or Jurnasnie, (a febrifuge,) or Goorajie, or Goondunie. It
is bitter, astringent, and sweet, and in digestion hot, light; inducing
costiveness; tonic; increases appetite; beneficial in jaundice and
Juzam; also in acne, cracks in the skin, nausea, fevers, and bilious
disorders. It forms an ingredient in all favorite formulæ. It has
been said to be cold. In my opinion it is either, according as it is
prescribed with other medicines. I have given it in continued fever,
in the quantity of one direm, cut small and infused in water for
a night, with great success. The Hindoos give a decoction of it in
fevers. I have given it in various ways in gonorrhoea, as a tonic,
an aphrodisiac, &c. Take of Bunslochun and Sut Gillo, each one masha,
mix and give in intermittents, or with cardamoms. My father used
it in pills made up with conserve of roses, with great efficacy,
in fevers of the continued kind; also with the whey of Kasni. Its
powder is likewise used with tin in gonorrhoea, but I have written
more of this in my other works. To make refined or Sut Gillo--

Take the Gillo, cut it in small pieces, and squeeze out the juice
into a vessel, then add plain water, and strongly mix them together,
let them remain thus for 24 hours, then throw away the clear water,
and dry the precipitate for use.

755 Gulhar.--"Nymphea Nilambo, Linn. Nilumbium Speciosum, W." The
flower of the Kawul (Lotus). It is cool, dry, heavy, and astringent,
and shuts up the chest. The centre of the flower, or yellow
fructification, is called Kesur, or Kinjeluk; it is cool; induces
costiveness; useful in bleeding piles; also in disorders of bile and
mucus. Its seed is usually called Kawulgutta; they are produced in
the hot season; they are sweet, cool; beneficial in bilious disorders,
foulness of blood, general heat, and increase mucus and wind. I have
given them in the diarrhoea of infants, mixed with the water which
they drank, with great benefit. The green part of the seed bruised in
water, I have also given to children with great good effect in wind
and diarrhoea. It is likewise given in eruptions of the mouth. The
stem of the flower and root are cool and dry; aphrodisiac, astringent,
and cure disorders of bile, blood, and general heat. The flowers are
of two kinds: one opens to the sun, and accompanies him round as
he moves, and shuts its leaves when he disappears; this is white,
with a red tinge, six-leaved, the yellow centre fructification, in
the shape of an inverted cone. Its seed is sweet and cool; clears
the complexion; of use in disorders of mucus, bile, blood, thirst,
general heat, Juzam, and blisters. It is an antidote to poisons,
and beneficial in acne of all kinds.

The other kind has four leaves, of a white color, opens to the moon,
and accompanies her, in progress, as the other does the sun; but does
not shut on her disappearance. The red and blue kinds, if they have
any degree of whiteness, are called Komode or Komoodutti; these names
are in allusion to their property of flowering by the moon's influence,
but they are more seldom met with. The blue is called also Neeloofir.

756 Goolkhairoo.--The marsh-mallow, or rather the mallow.

757 Kulumbuk.--A tree of a heavy texture, much veined; it is commonly
called Mulugeer, but this name is also applied to some kinds of lime.

758 Kooleejan.--"Piper Betel." The best kind is red, thick, and
full of knots. It is hot and dry in the 2nd degree; it is cardiac;
cures cholicks, pains in the kidnies; increases the strength of the
digestive organs, useful in rheumatism of the joints, decreases the
flow of urine; beneficial in epilepsy, headache; is aphrodisiac; and
is proper for those having a superabundance of mucus. A little kept
in the mouth will cure paralysis of the tongue; it clears the voice,
and in the quantity of one direm with cow's milk taken, fasting, it
is highly tonic and aphrodisiac. Its corrector is any oily substance
or Kuteera (a gum).

759 Koolunta.--A kind of Satawur.

760 Keloondha.--A name for the fruit of the Mowa tree.

761 Kulownjee.--A name for Siadana; expels wind and flatulence.

762 Kumode or Komoodutti, a kind of Gulhar. "Rottlera tinctoria."

763 Kumruk.--"Averrhoa Carambola," or Kumruka. A large tree, with many
pointed leaves, which when full grown are longer than the Singtirra
leaf, of a green color and soft texture. The fruit is common and
three-cornered; they are of an acid sweetness, and produced in the
cold season, and make delicious sherbet; cool, astringent; useful in
bile and wind, also in disorders of phlegm. From their acidity, the
fruit are injurious to the tongue. This may be corrected by eating
them with salt or lime.

764 Gumbhar.--Sweet, hot, heavy, and produces wind; useful in disorders
of bile, blood, and pains in the bowels, and induces costiveness. Its
fruit is heavy and tonic; clears the hair of the head; increases
seminal secretion; cures disorders of bile, wind, hectic fever, thirst,
and foulness of the blood; is diuretic, and forms an ingredient in
all famous prescriptions: called also Gumbharie or Gumbheer.

765 Kawul.--"Nymphæa Nelumbo." A name of Gulhar.

766 Kawulguth.--The seed of the Gulhar.

767 Kowla.--A kind of orange, less strong, and of weaker properties
than the Sangtirra; but in other respects the same; from its acid it
removes stagnation of bile, and is useful in cough and asthma.

768 Goond.--"Jasminum grandiflorum?" The wild Raibile; the flower cool
and light; used in disorders of bile and mucus, and in head-aches;
an antidote to poisons, and communicates its perfume to any article
from which oil is to be extracted, and gives the oil the quality
of strengthening the brain, and of being useful in affections from
cold. In my opinion, the flower is hot, as is also oil impregnated
with its odour. If it is mixed or rubbed with oil, and used as an
unguent in itch, it is equally effectual as the Chumbeley.

769 Gunyar.--A flower of India, possessing tonic properties; it
strengthens the stomach; used in the cure of Juzam, boils, eruptions,
disorders of the blood, swellings, and in cleansing ulcers.

770 Kunkole.--A seed resembling Peepul, only a little larger;
it creates appetite; is hot; useful in affections of the heart,
affections of wind and mucus.

771 Koontukphill.--A name for Lukudj, or Burhael; it is also called
Kuntukanta, from its being very prickly.

772 Kundurdolie.--The name of a plant, cool, light and astringent;
useful in heat, feverishness, thirst, disorders of mucus, blood and
bile, Juzam, and fever. It also softens iron.

773 Koondoorie.--A fruit like the Pulwull, of an oval shape. It is
acid, grows as a creeper, and used as a culinary vegetable; useful in
bilious disorders, foulness of blood, and general heat. Is emetic,
and reduces corpulency. Induces costiveness, flatulence, and wind;
also aphrodisiac. It is bitter, pungent; removes phlegm, and is an
antidote to poisons. In my opinion, it is cool and moist, aperient;
weakens the stomach, promotes absorption by increasing the tone of
the absorbents, and expedites digestion.

774 Kungni.--P. Kawurs, Sheerazee Kaal. Cool and bitter, dry and
astringent, yet diuretic; but if boiled in milk, its drying quality
will be corrected. It is very generally used as food. It increases
the viscidity of mucus, and promotes a disposition to gravel. Its
corrector is sugar. It is hurtful to the lungs; but here its corrector
is Mustaghi. In its general properties, it comes near the Cheena;
externally applied hot, it removes rheumatic pains. "Panicum Italicum."

775 Gundheel.--A. Azkhir, and some kinds called Mirchiakund. This
is a common plant, about a yard high; its flowers sweet-scented:
the properties of all are, I fancy, the same. It is astringent to
the taste, and bitter during digestion; hot, useful in affections of
the throat and heart, disorders of bile, blood, mucus, difficulty of
breathing, cough, and fever.

776 Goondur.--A kind of Loonia, q. v.

777 Kunaer or Kurneer. It is of two kinds, the white called Kurbaer,
and the red Ruketphup. The plant grows to the height of a man;
its branches numerous, and growing from near the root; its leaves
long as the bambu leaf and thicker, green and finely veined. It
is hot and light; decreases eye-sight, useful in Juzam, boils and
eruptions, acne, itch; is vermifuge, and may be ranked among the
poisons. Its flowers kept in the house produce strife. The root and
its bark is used as an application in cures of deficient aphrodisiac
power. A. Dufflie. "Nerium Odorum."

778 Koonja.--Vide Goonchee.

779 Kumbeela.--Bitter, laxative, and hot; used in disorders of mucus,
bile, and blood; is lithontriptic and vermifuge; cures Badgola, dropsy,
and boils; its green leaves are cool and astringent to the stomach;
it is called also Kumbeel.

780 Gunduk.--"Live Sulphur." In digestion it is bitter and hot,
also soft; beneficial in Juzam, affections of the spleen, disorders
of mucus and wind, and increases bile. It is an ingredient in many
favorite prescriptions. A. Ribreet. Its aruk is excellent as an
application in itch, and as a tonic is pungently acid and hurtful
to the teeth; indeed so very acid is it, that it dissolves shells,
and is called Tezab; but though acid, it is aphrodisiac.


To make Tezab (Sulphuric Acid).

Take a China cup, and make in it three holes, to suspend it (by a wire
of zinc); place a lamp on a low triangle (tripod), and fill the lamp
with sulphur; and making several wicks, mix them with the sulphur,
and set fire to them; place the China cup under the tripod, and the
aruk will come over into it by drops. Care must be taken to admit no
wind; when this is lighted the smoke destroys cloth. I have written
of the properties of this more at large in my other works.


The properties of Sulphuric Acid.

It is hot, creates appetite, expels wind, strengthens the stomach,
loins, and back. It is aphrodisiac, useful in disorders of mucus
and blood, in paralysis, convulsions, and pains in the stomach, and
discusses enlargement of the spleen, if taken to the quantity of from
one to four soorkhs in water. It will cure tooth-ache if applied to the
hollow of the tooth, but care must be taken that it does not come in
contact with a sound tooth. It cures all kinds of Psora, whether dry
or moist, applied by itself or in ointment. Taken internally with oil
of roses, it loosens phlegm; applied to the white spots of leprosy,
it will remove them. If nutmegs, cinnamon, and cloves be moistened
with it, and dried, they will become powerful condiments.

781 Kunoocha.--A name for Mirve.

782 Gundhur.--A name for culinary greens--see Chowlai.

783 Gundhka.--A title of Mudukpurnie; it derives its name from the
property of preserving the hair.

784 Kunghi.--"Malva Sylvestris.--(The Mallow) vide Goolkhairoo. The
mallow, emollient and demulcent, Althæa officinalis." The name of
a flower-stem of India, about a man's height, more or less. Its
leaves are round, smooth, serrated, and pointed. It is of two kinds,
a small and larger, the leaves large and small accordingly. It has
a small yellow flower; inside the seed vessel are many divisions,
in which the seeds are contained. It is very useful in piles.

A man had the bleeding piles to an annoying degree of severity. A
physician advised him to eat some of the leaves of this, bruised,
and made up with pepper into pills; he made up large pills or balls,
and eat them as directed, and was cured in a few days. If the fresh
leaves are used, they should be mixed with water and drank; if the
dried leaves are preferred, they should be made into pills. It is
mucilaginous and demulcent.

785 Gooroochna.--or Gooroochun. A stone, of a yellow color, on
which grass or moss grows; it is astringent and cool, beneficial in
possession, and whoever keeps it by them, will escape the influence of
all evils; it is useful in disorders of blood, and prevents abortion
by its tonic property in giving strength to the uterus. It is the
name for Huzerool bukur.

786 Goorcha.--"Menispermum cordifolium, W. Guduchi, S. Citamerdu,
Van Rheede, H. M. vii. 39. Menispermum Verrucosum, Roxb. MS. Putra
Waly. Jao. Funis Felleus, Rumph. Amb. v. 82. Sp. ch. perennial,
scandent, verrucose, leaves cordate, acuminate, entire, smooth, male
racemes from the naked branches simple, nectareal scales inserted
in the filaments. Every part of this plant exceedingly bitter;
used for the cure of intermittents; it is said by Captain Wright,
to be as powerful a febrifuge as the Peruvian Bark. V. Gillo."

787 Gowrdun.--A name for Koocha, called also Sutpootrie. It is the name
of the Kooza flower, red with a yellow fructification in the centre. It
has a fine perfume, and a distilled water is made from it; it is
a cinquefoil. One kind of it is the Goolseutie, P. Aussureen. This
is white, but a third kind is also red. All three are cool, light,
and aphrodisiac; useful in disorders of the three secretions and of
blood. It is cardiac, astringent, and improves the complexion. I have
found the white the most effectual, and have often used its conserve
and distilled water in lowness of spirits.

788 Gomenduk.--A common stone, resembling in its properties the
Chanderkanth.

789 Gooma.--A medicine of India; sweet, pungent, hot, dry, heavy,
aperient; used in disorders of wind, bile, mucus; in jaundice and in
swellings, and is vermifuge. All this the author of the Dhara Shekoi
has related. The common Gooma is different.

790 Goww.--A tree common in Cashmere, of a hot quality; used in
seminal weakness, inflammatory disorders of the nose, effects of
poison, disorders of mucus, and Juzam. It is vermifuge; its fruit
increases phlegm, and its gum is heavy, aphrodisiac; beneficial in
disorders of wind.

791 Kobhee.--"Hieracum, Bruce MS." This is of three kinds, one of
which is used as food for the parroquet. Its leaf is like that of the
radish when in an imperfect state. It is cool, light, and astringent;
used in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood; in seminal weakness,
cough, boils, eruptions, and fever, and produces wind.

792 Gowrbaghan.--Cool; useful in general heat and disorders of blood.

793 Godoon.--A common grain used by villagers; tonic.

794 Gowruk.--A kind of Lawa.

795 Koonj.--A name for Kulungh. Its meat cures disorders of wind
and mucus.

796 Koonch.--A medicine of Hindostan. If its seed-vessel be applied
to the skin, it produces great itching; if it is washed in cow-dung
and water, this effect will be removed. Its seed is like the bean,
smooth, and of a purple color; it is hard, and if the end is cut off,
and it be applied to the part stung by a scorpion, it will remove
the pain, and cannot be removed till the poison is extracted; and
when this is accomplished, it falls off itself, and will be found
from its power of suction to have become much larger. It is sweet,
increases semen, lengthens aphrodisia, and is useful in diffusion of
bile in the blood. It is beneficial in old ulcers, and is a favorite
ingredient in aphrodisiac formulæ.


Maadentezerrubad.

Kooch is a medicine of India; its seed cold and hot in equilibrium;
drying, aphrodisiac; strengthens the loins, useful in piles and cough,
and increases the consistence of semen. If half a direm of the leaves
be bruised with seven of the long fruit of the peepul in water, and
given to drink, it will be found powerfully vermifuge. It also clears
the intestines of all noxious matter. If 10 direms be bruised in 50
direms of water, and drank for seven days, it will cure Lues Venerea.

The succedaneum is Aotungun. The dose two direms of the seed. It is
also called Kooncha, vide Kewanch.

797 Kowrie.--"Cypræa Monita." P. Khirmora. It is sweet and pungent,
cool and flatulent; used in bile and heat; beneficial in affections
of the eyes and in blisters. If burnt and introduced into the ear,
I have found it of use in diseases of that organ. It is excellent
for cleansing and drying venereal sores.

798 Kawaal.--(The Hog.) Its meat is heating, moist, light, and
increases semen to a great degree; induces corpulence, creates
appetite, and is tonic. Its fat is very aphrodisiac as an external
application; it is also useful as an application to the eyes, as a
stomachic, preserving health, and producing aphrodisia. Is tonic;
useful in sprains and disorders of the three secretions. P. Khunzeer.

799 Kowa.--The Crow. P. Zaagh or Kolagh. A. Ghorab. Its properties
are mentioned in Yunani works in India; it is also called Koral.

800 Kokla.--"Indian Cuckoo."  A black bird, which in the commencement
of the hot weather has a fine and strong note; its flesh creates
appetite, induces costiveness, and is useful in disorders of wind
and mucus.

801 Goh.--The Guana. Its flesh is tonic, aphrodisiac, stomachic,
and used in disorders of bile and wind. A. Zubbub. P. Soosmar.

802 Kowadoorie.--A. Hubbunneel.

803 Gokhroo also Kunthphill; cures difficulty of breathing, cough,
and suppression of urine. Is lithontriptic; useful in affections of
the heart and wind.

A. Khussuk. It is of two kinds, a cultivated and wild. Its plant
is like the melon; its branches spreading widely on the ground. Its
fruit is hard and triangular, with prickles on its angles; thus it is
called Gokhroo. P. Kharkhusuk. There is a larger kind called Gokhroo
Dekanee. In the Dhunterri, it is said to be beneficial in the three
secretions, to create appetite, beneficial in dysentery and pains of
the bowels, to increase semen, induce corpulency, to be cool, sweet,
and aphrodisiac, tonic, useful in seminal weakness, gonorrhoea,
and pains in the urinary bladder. "Tribulus Lanuginosus."

804 Gowdunta.--A kind of arsenic, of a light red color.

805 Gota.--Sweet, bitter, pungent, hot, light, and aphrodisiac; useful
in Soorkhbad, acne, cough, Juzam, and disorders of wind and bile.

806 Kookurchundie.--Obtains the name from its being an emetic to dogs.

807 Kookurbangra.--A name for Kukrownda.

808 Goondroo or Goonderuk. A name for Koondur, a gum resembling
Mastich, but more red; it cures disorders of wind, mucus, and fever;
restrains perspiration; is aphrodisiac; strengthens memory; gives
tone to the stomach, urinary bladder, brain.

809 Googul.--Amygris Agalocha (Roxb.) sweet and bitter, hot and
aperient; increases appetite; increases the bulk of the solids, and
is aphrodisiac; reunites fractured bones, discusses indurations;
used in disorders of wind, mucus, blood, boils, eruptions,
ill-conditioned ulcers, seminal weakness, Juzam, Soorkhbad, debility,
emaciation, sweating sickness, acne, and swellings. The older
it is the more effectual. It forms an ingredient in all favorite
formulæ. A. Mukul. One kind is called Bhainsia Googul.

810 Goondinie.--A common fruit of Hindostan, of a red color, and fine
coat, about the size of the Khalsa, or larger, and more oval. It is
aperient, suppurant, and vermifuge. It is sweet and cool; of use in
cough and flatulence, but if taken in quantity, produces nausea.

811 Gooha.--A name for Perestpirnie; also the name of an insect like
the cricket, but larger; it makes much noise in the rains.

812 Goolur.--"Ficus Glomerata." A common fruit; when young, it is
green, but when ripe, it becomes red, and in this state it is filled
with small insects; it is said that if eaten without being opened,
it will be found beneficial for the eyes. It is called cool and dry;
some say hot and moist: but in my opinion it is cool and moist,
and decreases bile. My father prescribed it in its unripe state in
laxities of the bowels, and also in bleeding piles. The physicians of
India have described it as astringent; it is slow of digestion. The
bark of the tree is useful in ulcers, and as an external application
in severe bruises. Water drank after its use, produces pain in
the bowels. The Goolur eat with barley-meal or sugar, is useful in
giddiness and heat in the liver. Its milk applied to boils, hasten
suppuration or resolution.


Maadentezerrubad.

Goolur is cool and moist; useful in bilious complaints, heat, thirst,
and running at the nose from heat. The decoction of the bark removes
poison from wounds inflicted by the claws of the tiger, cat, or other
animal. The root bruised in water is useful in dysentery, in a dose
of two direms.

813 Goonma.--"Pharnaceum mollugo." The plant grows in waste and wild
places, and is very common. It is about a yard high, and grows in the
rains; it is many-flowered; and when young they are of a red color,
but become grey when dry, and full of small holes; they are round
and curled.

814 Koonda.--Koonda, called also Pita. A. Midjdubeh, and in
P. Puzdubeh. It is a creeper; its leaves like the Gourd leaf, or
larger; its fruit twice as large as a melon. When unripe, it is
cooling, and useful in bilious disorders and wind; it increases
mucus. When ripe, it is sweet and pungent; it is equal in its
properties; light; creates appetite; assists digestion; useful in
disorders of the stomach and of the three secretions. The fibres of
its root, its leaves, and branches, are sweet; beneficial in disorders
of wind and mucus; are lithontriptic: the soft part of the fruit is
sweet, removes gravel and other disorders of the urinary bladder;
cures bilious disorders, and is aphrodisiac. The particular mode
of administering it, I have described in my other works. It is
very useful as an aphrodisiac, and for increasing the bulk of the
solids. Cucurbita Pepo.

Its sherbet is useful in all the disorders above mentioned, also in
depression of spirits from heat, in mania or disordered imagination;
increases appetite and evacuates bile.


The sherbet is thus prepared:

A piece is cut off from the end of the fruit, and the inside scooped
out till the hand can be admitted; this is to be filled with fine
sugar, taking care to preserve all the juice. The divided piece is
then to be re-applied, the division secured with moistened flour;
it is then placed in the sun, during the hot season, for four days,
or in the cold weather for a week. It by this process becomes acid
like oxymel; the juice is then taken out, strained, and seasoned
with cardamums, saffron, musk, and cloves, or other articles as may
be deemed proper, and preserved in bottles for use; the dose is four
tolahs, but it will not keep good beyond a week.

815 Khaer.--Vide Kut. "Acacia Catechu, Mimosa Catechu. Chadira, S." A
tree of the jungles, from which Catechu is produced. It is called
also Cudder. "One of the best applications in ulcers I ever tried, is
composed of Catechu, Camphor, and white lead, in equal parts."--Trans.

816 Geerehti.--A plant, about a yard high, or less; the largest kind
is named Geerehta, also Mahabela. Its leaves are larger, as well
as the tree, than the Geerehtee; but the latter is to be preferred
as a medicine. It is sweet, cool, moist, and astringent, useful in
Soorkhbad, disorders of bile, affections of the uterus, and clears
the complexion.

817 Kherie.--An earth of a white color used in cleaning houses;
one kind of it is called Goorboghan.

818 Kyrnie.--One kind of it is named Chupuk. It is the fruit of a
very large tree, of a yellow color, about the size of a date, but
thicker; both kinds are cool and moist, heavy and tonic; useful in
thirst, delirium, heaviness of the head, and disorders of all the
secretions. If the kernel is bruised in water and applied to the
eyes, it will remove opacities of the cornea--this I know from my
grand-father's experience.

In my opinion, it is cardiac and stomachic, and gently astringent;
when ripe it is very generally useful. Some have called it hot in the
second and dry in the first degree. If eaten when unripe, there is fear
of its producing cholic. Its corrector is dhaie. The kernel is bitter.

819 Koontanduk.--A kind of Rice, like the Saatee in its properties.

820 Ghora.--P. Asp. The horse; its meat is sweet to the taste, but
bitter in digestion. It is light, creates appetite, increases bile and
mucus, beneficial in disorders of wind, and increases aphrodisia. It
is generally tonic, and strengthens the eyes. I have often eat of it,
and believe it to be hot and tonic, but it is hurtful to those of hot
temperament. In some countries, it is used as food, and it was so used
by Vizier Nawab Kumruddin Khan. I have remarked, that when used in
this country as food by the natives of other countries, it produces
a fermentation in the blood, and consequent eruptions in the mouth
and tongue. Its properties are particularly noticed in Yunani works,
and I have conversed with many who considered the milk of the mare
excellent as a stomachic and aphrodisiac.

821 Khutmul.--P. Saas. A. Fusafush. It is bred in beds or other
furniture. Its smell is very useful in epilepsy; bruised in water
and used as an injection into the urethra, it will be found useful
in suppression of urine.

822 Kujoor.--Phoenix dactylifera or Phoenix Silvestris or
Khurjoor. A. Kittub. It has many fruits, even to the number of many
hundreds: in its properties it is very similar to the Pind-Kajoor.

823 Khaperia.--A. Tooti. P. Sungbusseri. It is useful in affections of
the eyes and eye sight. Its powder beneficial for cleaning and healing
ulcers. Its ointment I have noticed in my other publications. I have
known a person who used it commonly as a tonic to the stomach, and for
correcting laxities of the bowels. It is also used in Indian Recipes,
but I have never seen that any physician of celebrity recommended
its use.

824 Keera or Kheera. One kind of this is bitter, but both are
cool and dry, diuretic, and aperient; useful in disorders of bile,
lithontriptic, and beneficial in suppression of urine. The ripe fruit
is sweet and little astringent. The Balum-kheera is a kind of this,
but of less efficacy. The large kind, from its efficacy and scarcity,
was usually sent to the emperor by the Marwar Rajah. It is highly
spoken of for the cure of Remittent Fever.

825 Khand.--Heavy, creating appetite, tonic, aperient; useful in
thirst, general heat, delirium, disorders of bile and wind; but if
eaten to excess it produces bile.

826 Khylakhylie.--A name for Silleekha. Its rind is hard and thick,
and of a round shape; it is of a reddish clay color. It is the bark
of a tree; some say it is not the Silleekha, but that it nearly
resembles it. It forms an ingredient in formulæ for strengthening
the loins and kidnies. It dries up the vagina, and is used by women
in the cold season as an ingredient in Peendie.

827 Ghekwaar or Ghwar. "Aloe Perfoliata, W. Ghrita Cumari and Taruni,
S. Elwa (the gum), H. Musebber, A. Suc d'Aloes (the gum), F. Glausinde
Aloe, G. Aloe, I. Aloe, Sp." It is the Sibr plant, and is in height
about a yard, becoming small towards the top; it is full of juice of
an offensive smell; it (the leaf) is serrated on the edges, and is of a
green color. It is bitter, cool, and aperient, useful in affections of
the spleen and liver, disorders of mucus, bile, blood, fever, blisters,
and hardness of the skin; and slightly increases bile. If rubbed with
water on the hands, fire may be held with impunity. Its juice is well
known as a medicine, mixed with anise seed; it is excellent in pains
of the bowels. I have written more of its virtues in my other works,
and the prescription there mentioned is excellent in all disorders
from cold. The pulp of the leaf with alum and opium is excellent in
ophthalmia; its juice dropt into the eye.

828 Goongchee.--"Abrus Precatorius. Gooncha, H. Gunja, S. The
seed called Retti, H. Rectica, S. The root of the plant coincides
very exactly in appearance, taste, and medicinal qualities with the
liquorice root, and is sold for it in the bazar; vide Glycine Abrus,
Linn, Flem."


Maadentezerrubad.

Goongchee, called also Retti, is hot and dry; its dose one direm. In
the opinion of the people of India, it is cool and dry in the third
degree. It is emetic, and violently purgative, and is considered a
poison. If the Goongchee is reduced to a coarse powder, moistened
with water, and bruised and fried in sweet oil, till it is dissolved;
this oil applied in the morning to the head, and washed off at night,
and this repeated for 21 days, it will greatly increase the growth
of the hair; its leaves and branches thus prepared have the same effect

If the Red Goongcha, having its bark peeled off, be coarse pounded
to the quantity of eight ounces, and boiled in eight pounds of cow's
milk, till only three pounds remain, then coagulated, and its butter
extracted; the butter will reproduce hair on any parts which may have
been deprived of it by venereal or other disease, and the effect will
take place by its continuance for a fortnight. The white Goonchee,
in the quantity of two direms, given internally for three days,
with sugar, to a woman, will render her barren.

829 Khelowrie.--The name for the composition of certain pills, about
the size of Peepul seed, sold covered with silver leaf; they are highly
scented, and improve the smell of the mouth; they enliven the spirits
and strengthen the stomach. They are made of Kuth in this manner:

The Catechu is first mixed well with water, and the precipitate
taken for use. This is boiled in cow's milk, or sometimes in the
above-mentioned water; then Musk Amber and Rose-water are added,
or the distilled water of Keora, and from this the pills are formed.

830 Khull.--A name for Kus'boosum seem; the refuse of Till. It is
heavy and flatulent, weakens eye-sight; is aphrodisiac; and is used
as a soap to remove grease from the hands.

831 Khopra.--A name for Narzeel. Its properties mentioned in Yunani
works.

832 Khewumberie.--The wild fig; useful in white leprosy. All
Indian physicians use the root in this disease, both internally and
externally; some have called it hot, others cold; it is likewise
named Kewumber.

833 Khesoo.--A root; the leaf of its tree resembles a tiger's
claws. Its flower is yellow; the tree large and common all over the
jungles, and becomes of a red color like fire.

834 Khynth.--A tree of India; its fruit acid like the apple when
unripe; it is light; cures thirst, hiccup, disorders of wind and
bile. It clears the throat; is difficult of digestion, and strengthens
the stomach, and is lithontriptic; beneficial in fulness of the head,
and is cool and dry in the second degree.

835 Gheyd.--A kind of Vulture. Its flesh is beneficial in disorders of
the eyes; it is a bird of prey; hot and dry: it is of a black color,
though some have described it as grey. The Baaz and Joorra are used
in hawking. A. Okab, P. Aal.

836 Kinchua.--A name of Kherrateen. The earth-worm. It is used in
oil and fomentation as an aphrodisiac, and for this purpose the most
powerful is the Lumbricus discharged from the human subject.


Maadentezerrubad.

It is said, that if the Kinchua be dried and mixed with dhaie, it will
contract the vagina. If it be mixed with sweet oil, and boiled, and
in this Zaftroomie (pitch) be dissolved, and the mixture externally
applied, it will increase the size of the male organ. From the worm a
kind of copper is procured, which is called in India Paak Tamba. If
put in the mouth it has this effect, that the taste of the neeb, or
pungency of chunam will not be perceptible. It is an antidote to all
animal as well as vegetable poisons, and hydrophobia; useful in want
of power in the digestive organs and pains in the bowels. Its powder
is useful in the Soorkhbad, and kept in the mouth, prevents thirst;
and if kept about the person a snake will not approach or bite. Thus
prepared:--The fresh worms are taken and put into a copper vessel,
over them is poured lime juice, and the vessel well luted, is placed
on the fire; when well boiled, the medicine will be found adhering
to the top and sides of the vessel.


Another mode.

Take of white lead and borax, each eight direms; turmeric and
bullock's bile, each four direms; worms and honey, each 24 direms;
mix and fry the whole in cow's ghee, and when fried, make the mass
into balls. Place these balls in an earthen vessel on the fire, and
by means of bellows increase the heat, and keep it so, for some time;
and when taken off the fire, the Paak Tamba will be found in small
grains at the bottom.

837 Gyndha.--Rhinoceros. A four-footed beast, larger than the
buffaloe. Its skin black and indented; it is very hard, and used for
making shields, which are held in great estimation. It has a horn
near its nose. Its flesh is used in disorders of wind, and decreases
urine and fæces. The smoke of the horn while burning is excellent in
the cure of piles, and for producing easy labour; drinking water from
a cup made of the horn will also cure the piles. P. Kurguddun.

838 Kenkra.--Its flesh is cool, and strengthens the seven component
parts of the body; is aphrodisiac, and remedies profuse discharge of
the menses. "The Crab."

839 Kesur or Kunkum. Saffron. It is pungent and hot; exhilirates
the spirit; useful in hiccup and in affections of the skin from a
taint in the blood; it is beneficial in head-ache; allays vomiting;
is vermifuge; cures boils and disorders of the three secretions,
and cleans the complexion. P. Zaffraan.

840 Kyte.--When unripe, it is light; induces costiveness; used in
disorders of the three secretions. When ripe, it becomes of a bitterish
sweet, and is useful in dropsy, eruptions of the mouth, and in wind. It
is heavy, clears the throat, is slow of digestion, and allays thirst.

841 Kytiputtrie.--Its leaves resemble the Kyte; it is hot and pungent;
used in disorders from poison, phlegm in the throat, and seminal
weakness.

842 Kyloot.--Cool, astringent; useful in eruptions of the mouth,
in mucus, and flatulent disorders.

843 Keora.--Pandanus Odoratissimus, (Roxb.) It is like the Ketki,
but it is twice as large; its leaves are prickly, and about the
same thickness throughout. It is in fact like a head of Indian
corn before its leaves recede. It has a very powerful, penetrating,
diffusible scent, more perceptible at a distance than when close;
and after it is dried the smell remains. If it is put amongst linen,
the smell will adhere to it for a length of time. The plant is about
12 feet high; its leaves resemble the Juwar, and are long and trefoil,
with prickles upon all of them; it flowers when four years old. Earth
is thrown up round the roots every year. In the Deccan and in Behar,
it is very common. A distilled water is made from its flowers, which
is cardiac and stomachic.

844 Kethki.--Also Pandanus Odoratissimus, for it is a kind of
Keora. The Sirrunkethkie is also a species of this.

845 Kewanch.--Sweet, hot, heavy, and aphrodisiac; produces an increased
secretion of semen. Its seed is useful in disorders of wind, and is
also aphrodisiac. It is a name for Kabeakudje, and that is a species of
Curruf's junglee. It is also a name for Dolichos Pruriens or Cow-itch.

846 Kela.--Musa Paradisiaca. The Plantain or Banana. The tree is
straight, about the height of a spear. Its leaves, when young,
come out in the form of a round ruler, and are soft as satin,
and much resembling it, with cross marks resembling the plaits of
cloth. The leaf when expanded is very long and broad. Its flower is
a hard substance, of a pyramidal shape, and covered with leaves of a
dark-red color. Every tree which has flowered bears 70 or 80 plantains,
formed in distinct rows round a centre stem, and the tree bears only
once. And the fruit ripe, the tree must be cut down, to leave room
for others to spring up from the same root. There are many kinds of
this fruit. The best kind is small, and called Imrutbean; and the
people of India have said that the camphor is produced from it: but
those who say so are ignorant, the camphor tree is very different. Its
root is tonic; beneficial in disorders of bile, blood, and mucus, and
in gonorrhoea; but it weakens aphrodisia. The fruit is sweet, cool,
moist, and heavy; increases flatulence and mucus; useful in disorders
of bile, blood, wind, and heat of the chest. A. Mooz. The natives of
India dress the unripe fruit with meat, or even dress it alone; and
the Hindoos dress the heart of the branches for food. This I have
found very effectual as an aphrodisiac and for increasing semen,
and as a tonic to the brain. It weakens the stomach, and is heavy;
its corrector is cardamum seed. The Yunani physicians say, that its
correctors are honey, gum, and ginger.

847 Keetkarode.--A name for Baraicund.

848 Keekur or Babool. "Acacia Arabica, W. Babool, H. Barbura,
S. Babool ka Goond (the gum), H. The bark, like that of most of
the Acacias, is a powerful astringent, and is used as a substitute
for Oak bark in tanning by leather-manufacturers in India. Gomme
Arabique, F. Arabischen Gummi, G. Gomma Arabica, I. Vullam pisin,
Tam." A common prickly tree of the jungles; its leaves very numerous
and small; it is of two kinds, a large and a small. The young trees
have very numerous prickles, the old trees have fewer; its bark kept
in the mouth relieves cough. Its leaves heated and applied to the eye
removes heat and inflammation; both kinds are astringent, hot, and
pungent, useful in cough, mucus, and diseases proceeding from mucus;
restrain laxatives of the bowels, and are useful in piles. The young
leaves infused for a night in water, in the morning bruised in the
water, and this drank, will be found very useful in gonorrhoea and
itchiness of the bladder.

849 Keet or Keetie. The refuse or scoriæ of iron; it is sweet, pungent,
and hot; beneficial in wind, worms, cholicks, seminal weakness,
and swellings.

850 Gehoon.--A name for Gundum. A. Hinta. It is oleaginous and slow
of digestion; facilitates the junction of fractured bones. Is soft,
tonic, useful in mucus, and increases semen. Its oil is beneficial in
Daad and swellings from vitiated bile. The oil is thus made:--White
Gehoon is moistened for a night in water, and in the morning the oil
is extracted.

851 Geroo.--It is sweet, astringent, and cool; useful in ulcers;
clears the skin; beneficial in piles, heat, and incipient phlegmon. It
resembles the Gilermonie, and is often substituted for it.

852 Laak.--Common lac is a kind of wax, formed by the Coccus Lacca:
cool, moist; clears the color of the skin; is aphrodisiac; useful
in disorders of mucus, blood, bile; and is vermifuge. It also cures
boils, eruptions, acne, bruises, and Juzam, and removes possession
by evil spirits. I have found it to be very aphrodisiac.

This is the gum of the Baer tree. There is one kind of Seed Lac,
which when melted becomes like this.

853 Lahi.--A name for Ulsee.

854 Langullie.--The name of a shrub, pungent and hot; useful in
disorders of wind, mucus, and ulcers, also in affections of the
stomach and bowels; is laxative.

855 Lubhera.--Hot; antidote to poison; useful in blisters, boils,
acne, and Juzam; strengthens the hair of the head; is aphrodisiac;
useful in disorders of wind, blood, and in hectic fever.

856 Lublie or Lolie. A high tree with very numerous leaves and
branches; the leaves are smooth and shining, and when rubbed, have
a sweet smell: they are of a yellowish color. Its bark is soft
and flexible; the fruit like the Malkungnie, but of a dark-purple
color. The properties of the fruit are, that it cures disorders
of blood, and piles, superabundance of wind, and eruptions of the
mouth. It is light, and the kernel of the seed is of the same nature.

857 Lutoobrie.--Called also Soonitjhal. The plant is about half a yard
in height, it grows in the hot weather on the banks of the rivers or
near water; brought in contact with the skin, it produces itching
and pimples. The Hindoos use it as pickles by cutting the branches
in pieces, infusing them in water for several days till they become
sour. It is hot, and its juice very useful in ringworm. It in the
first place causes a great discharge of water from the parts, and
then heals them up. If it is bruised and applied for three days to
parts void of sensation, it will produce blisters, and the water being
discharged, and common ointment applied to the parts, the cure will
be found complete. It dissipates wind. The leaves resemble Tirriteruk;
the flower is yellow like the Baboona.

858 Lydoaloo.--"Mimosa Natans." Bitter, astringent, and cool; used in
the cure of disorders of mucus and bile, eruptions from diffusion of
bile, pains or inflammation in the female parts of generation, and
restrains diarrhoea. It is sensitive, and contracts to the touch. I
have seen the plants, and noticed that the leaves resembled those of
the tamarind, but are smaller. Its branches small, with very minute
prickles. It is said that it grows to a yard in height, and that it
is so very sensitive that it contracts if a shadow passes over it.

859 Lichmuna.--The female called Lichmunie. It is cool, aperient,
and aphrodisiac; useful in disorders of wind, bile and mucus. It is
the name of the Nuffaa, also called the small Kuthui.

860 Lichmiphill.--A name for Bele.

861 Lichkutch.--A name for Burhel, also called Lukitch.

862 Lukmunia and Lukmunie. Names for Litchmuna. In A. called Beroogus
sunum. P. Mirdumgeea.

863 Loodh'phup.--Sweet, cool, moist, and light; tonic, astringent,
and diuretic; relieves disorders of bile, and slightly increases
mucus and wind.

864 Lodh.--"Simplocus Racemosa." A kind of this is white. I have
not seen the tree; the bark is brought from the hills; thick, and
of a white color; both kinds are astringent, cool, and aperient;
strengthens the eyes; beneficial in disorders of mucus, blood, and
swellings; useful in vomiting of blood, and is laxative. Its flower
is sweet, bitter, and astringent; of use in affections of the eyes and
mucus; increases the consistence of semen, and is an ingredient in all
aphrodisiac formulæ. The particular manner of its administration I have
given in my other publications. The Lodh Pytanee is a kind of this.


Maadentezerrubad.

Lodh is of two kinds, one from Guzeerat, of a reddish clear color,
the other from the hills of Hindustan, of a dirty greenish hue, and
underneath reddish. The latter is used by the dyers, and the former
in medicine. It is beneficial in disorders of the eyes; it is cool,
dry, and astringent; restrains vomiting of blood; generally styptic,
and as a cold application, removes pain of the eye. Dose one miskal.

865 Lawa.--"Perdix Chinensis." A bird smaller than the partridge;
of this the people of India have enumerated four kinds--Bansal,
Goruk, Goonderuck, and Durber. The meat of three of them is cool,
moist, cardiac, astringent, and stomachic. The first kind is hot,
increases mucus, and beneficial in disorders of wind. The second kind
is useful in mucous disorders. The third kind is light; its properties
in equilibrium; useful as food for the debilitated.

866 Loonia.--"Portulaca oleracea." Culinary greens; another kind
is called Koonder. Both are saltish to the taste, and sweet during
digestion; cool and dry, heavy and aperient; increase wind and
flatulent swellings of the abdomen, also bile and mucus. The other
kind is understood to be hot; useful in difficulty of breathing,
disorders of mucus, and increases flatulence.

867 Loha.--Ferrum, Iron. Ayas, S. Sweet and astringent, cool and
aphrodisiac, aperient and heavy; useful in disorders of mucus and
bile, and in swellings; it produces wind. Its scoriæ are called
Rubusool hudeed; it is given both in powder and pills: the method of
its preparation I have given in my other works. I have given iron in
piles from cold, also for strengthening the stomach, for lengthening
aphrodisia, and generally as an aphrodisiac. I have also exhibited it
with success in dropsy. It is commonly used by physicians in India,
but my advice is to have as little to do with it as possible.

868 Long.--"Caryophillus Aromaticus." A. Kurnphul. Its properties
are particularized in Yunani works. If it be introduced into an
apple, and the apple left to dry, then taken out, I have found it
an excellent tonic to the stomach, possessing a cardiac property,
useful in vomiting, and aiding digestion. The apple also will have
become possessed of the same qualities.

869 Lobaan.--"Libanus Thurifera, Coll. Boswellia, Roxb. Olibanum,
Frankincense. Encens, F. Styrax Benzoin, Murr. Resin of Boswellia
serrata, Roxb." The vizier of Ackber Shah has written, that this is a
gum brought from beyond sea. It has a fine and penetrating smell when
burnt; some call it Meeayabisa. It is very plentiful in this country.

It would seem to be hot in the 2nd degree. In the refined state,
it is most powerful, and very little of it will be sufficient.


Maadentezerrubad.

Loban is called in P. Hussunluba. The people of India know it as a gum;
its color is red, and mixed with pieces of white and black as large
as a cowrie. It is hot in the 2nd degree and dry in the 1st. Its
internal use is tonic to the stomach and brain; it discusses wind,
removes phlegm, and is useful for removing running at the nose. In
those of a hot temperament it removes head-ache. Its corrector is oil
of the Banufsha or Khushkhash. Its succedaneum Ladun and Mastichi
in equal parts. The dose is from half direm to two direms. What is
called in India Sut Loban is white, clear, and shining, like Talc,
and is much used in mucous disorders and in paralysis. It is also
beneficial in bad breath. It is stomachic, aphrodisiac, and assists
digestion. The dose two soorkhs in Paan. The expressed oil, applied
to the penis, is aphrodisiac, and also useful in disorders of mucus.

870 Loni.--P. Neemuk, q. v.

871 Lolie.--A name for Lublie.

872 Lomrie.--The Fox. A name for the Sheghal or Sial.

873 Longmushk.--The name of a flower; its shrub about two yards in
height, but of great diameter. It is white, sweet-smelling, hot,
cardiac, and strengthens the brain.

874 Lobeia.--"Dolichos Sinensis." A common culinary grain; hot and
dry; creates flatulence; is diuretic, and increases the menstrual
flux. It has also the effect of producing very unpleasant dreams.

The red Lobeia procures the expulsion of the dead foetus ex
utero, and if ate with cow's ghee, it strengthens the digestive
organs. A. Dizzer. P. Bakla.

875 Lahsun.--"Allium Sativum, W. Lasuna, S. Ail, F. Knoblauch,
G. Aglio, I. Ajo Sativo, S." Hot and moist; heavy, aperient,
aphrodisiac; promotes digestion, and is useful externally in sprains
and hurts; increases the hair and knowledge, also bile and blood;
beneficial in disorders of mucus, wind, difficulty of breathing, cough,
Badgola, intermittent fever, swellings, piles, Juzam, and seminal
weakness. It is vermifuge, tonic, and cures loss of appetite. It is
an ingredient in all favorite prescriptions.

Its sherbet I have used with much effect in cases of paralysis. One
kind of Lahsun is called Agbooptah. A. Mowseer. As a tonic, this is
to be preferred, and its pickles are held in great estimation.

876 Lasora.--"Sobestens Cordia Myxa, W. A. Sepista." Its leaves bruised
and applied to ill-conditioned ulcers, will cure them in 10 days.

877 Lahusoonia.--A kind of Dedawrie. A. Aynulhur. See
Vidoorie.

878 Malkungnie.--"Ceanothus Americanus? Celastrus." A seed resembling
Anbus saleb, but smaller and variegated; its upper rind is green,
inside which is red, and withinside this is found the seed fine long
and of a reddish color; it is bitter and pungent, hot and aperient;
useful in affections of wind and mucus, difficulty of breathing, and
cough. It increases understanding and memory. In India, those who try
its effects use it in many ways. One method is to eat one seed the
first day, two the 2nd, and so on, increasing by one till 40 seeds
are eaten in a day, then decrease in the same proportion. Some use
it this way for only eight days, after which they continue to take
this quantity without increase, and during its use, they abstain
from all acids, sour milk, radishes, Till, limes, mustard, and other
articles of this nature; during this time also, they separate beds
from their wives.

It increases the tone of the vessels; preserves health and strength.

The Hindoos enumerate many virtues of which the drug is possessed. It
is understood to be hot in the 1st degree, and dry in the 3rd. It is
a favorite ingredient in fomentations, unguents, and prescriptions
for aphrodisia and paralysis. It is in very general use.

879 Madhooie.--A flower of India; cool and light, and useful in
disorders of the three secretions.

880 Mansrowhnee.--A purgative medicine, useful in disorders of wind,
bile, and mucus, and is aphrodisiac.

881 Maak.--Phaseolus Max. A name for Aorde, called also Maash; it is
sweet during digestion; hot, heavy and aphrodisiac; used in disorders
of wind; is tonic; a preservative to health, increases semen, milk,
and fat; also mucus and bile; clears the urinary secretion; beneficial
in piles, paralysis, affections of the liver, difficulty of breathing,
and Badgola; said to be useful in cholic, but as to the three latter,
I am not so certain about them, and suspect it might prove more likely
to increase them.

882 Maad.--The water in which rice has been boiled, and in which the
rice has become decomposed; it is cool, astringent; creates appetite;
expels wind, mucus and bile; softens the muscles, and is beneficial
in bilious or mucous fevers.

883 Maien.--Acid, astringent, cool, and light; contracts the vagina;
useful in dysentery, disorders of bile, blood, and mucus; also
affections of the throat. A. Kuzmazidge. P. Kurmar.

884 Maachik.--A name for honey of a reddish color; it is sweet, cool,
dry, and light; reduces corpulency, strengthens vision, increases
understanding, and beneficial in seminal weakness. The fresh kind
is moist and aperient; that which is old is dry, and if heated is
hurtful. I mean that which has been fermented, and that produced in
hot climates.

885 Majoophill or Maijphill. A. Affix. "Alleppo Galls, Quercus Cerris,
Quercus Robur." It is hot and astringent; useful in wind; blackens
the hair, and contracts the vagina.

886 Maankund.--A name for Istolekund.

887 Malook.--A name for Palook.

888 Mahesingie.--The author of the Dhara Shekoi has called this the
water-scorpion; see Beechoo.

889 Maat.--The name of a culinary green, used as food. If the root of
this plant be cleared of the bark, and 100 tolahs of this be boiled
in 100 tolahs of milk, and as much fine honey, over a gentle fire,
taken out and put in a vessel for use, it will be found highly useful
in reproducing the secretion of milk in the breast of a woman, and
is thus used: The woman is to anoint her body with sweet oil, then
bathe in warm water, after which a little of this to be ate, and care
taken that no wind obtain admission to the place where she sleeps;
this done for 14 days, milk will be produced in great abundance.

890 Maashpurnie.--Obtains its name from its leaves resembling Maash;
it is called also Makonie; it is cool, dry, sweet, and pungent to
the taste. Increases semen and mucus; useful in fever, eruptions of
the mouth, dryness of the fauces, disorders of blood, and costiveness.

891 Muttur.--"Pisum Sativum. P. Kusshuba." Hot, heavy, and aperient;
increases wind, bile, and blood; is diuretic, and increases secretion
of milk; useful in external swellings and disorders of mucus, weakens
eye-sight and decreases semen. One kind is called Betla, and another is
very small; both of these are sweet to the taste; in digestion cool,
light, and astringent; useful in disorders of wind, mucus, and bile,
and it is the best food for cows.

892 Muttreegurba.--The eggs of fish. Moist, heavy, and aphrodisiac;
tonic; induces corpulency, increases mucus and the bulk of the solids;
brings on heaviness of the spirits and indolence, and cures seminal
weakness.

893 Muchechi.--Cool and astringent; useful in Juzam, disorders of
bile and blood, and is vermifuge.

894 Mucheli.--Hot, moist, heavy, aphrodisiac, and tonic; increases
phlegm and bile; beneficial in the seven dhats, and useful in disorders
of wind.

The river fish is the best, and most powerful as an aphrodisiac,
and tonic. The tank fish are cool, heavy, moist, and aphrodisiac,
also diuretic. Well fish are aphrodisiac and diuretic, increase mucus,
cause disorders of the bowels and Juzam, and are flatulent. The fish
of jheels, or large pieces of water, have the same properties as
the tank fish; and those of small pools or puddles are sweet, moist,
tonic, and useful, and cure disorders of wind. Salt-water fish produce
bile in a slight degree, and are heavy. All fish induce costiveness
and decrease the strength of the eyes, and the clearer the water,
the more beneficial and more powerful are the properties of the
fish. It will be prudent not to use well fish in cold weather. One
kind of fish is very small, and named Pothee, q. v.

895 Mujeeth.--'Rubia Munjith, Roxb. MS. Sp. ch. pentandrous,
perennial, scandent, branches with four hisped angles, leaves quatern,
long-petioled, cordate, acuminate, 5-7-nerved, hisped.' "Madder: given
in the quantity of one pice weight in milk, several times repeated,
its effects are very powerful; it affects the whole nervous system,
produces profuse sweating, temporary delirium, mental agony and tears,
with an evident determination to the uterine system."--Trans.

A root of a red color, used by the dyers. It is an emmenagogue, and
its taste is sweet, bitter, astringent; hot and heavy; clears the
voice and complexion; useful in disorders from poison, mucus, blood,
swellings, ophthalmia, itchiness of the liver, pains, in the female
parts of generation; Juzam, eruptions, acne, boils, seminal weakness,
and dysentery. Its green leaves are sweet to the taste, moist, and
create appetite, and beneficial in bilious disorders. A. Foo. H. Aal,
q. v.

896 Moojkund.--A small plant; pungent, bitter; useful in mucous
disorders, cough, and itch. It is very common in hilly countries.

897 Mudhraa.--A name for Kakoli, from its sweet taste so called.

898 Muddenphill.--A name for Mynphill.

899 Mudden.--A name for Moom.

900 Mudh.--Honey.

901 Moodukpurnie or Rakanie. Cool; beneficial in cough, wind,
blood, bilious heat, fever, semen, and eye-sight; it is also
called Maagpurnie. It is called Mudukpurnie, from its leaf so nearly
resembling that of the Moong; Muduk being a name for Moong, and purn,
a leaf.

902 Mudhoolka.--A kind of grain; its properties the same as the
Muckund.

903 Mudhkurkuttie.--A kind of rice; sweet, cool, and heavy; increases
blood and causes eruptions in the mouth.

904 Moorhurrie.--Sweet and bitter, heavy and aperient; cures disorders
of bile, blood, mucus, wind, thirst, affections of the heart, itch,
Juzam, and fever.

905 Moora.--A leaf resembling the Mendhi, brought from Lahore;
cool and light; cures possession from evil spirits; is vermifuge,
and useful in disorders of bile, wind, and blood; also in Juzam.

906 Merg.--P. Ahoo. Its flesh is sweeter than of any other animal;
a little acid and saltish; bitter, pungent, and astringent; it is
cool and light, flatulent; creates appetite; useful in disorders of
all the secretions; is tonic, cardiac, beneficial in fever, and is
an excellent medicated food.

907 Murua.--Some say this is hot and light in the 3rd degree, and some
that it is in equilibrio; it loosens mucus from the head, and dispels
wind. If boiled in vinegar, and used as an external application to the
head, it will remove obstructions that produce head-ache. Prepared
in this way, it also removes swellings or eruptions caused by heat
or irritating applications. It is cardiac and stomachic, discusses
collections of bile, removes the effects of any animal poison, Juzam,
and disorders of mucus and wind. Is vermifuge. A. Isoomulphar.

908 Moorhuttee or Mudhserda. Cool, heavy, tonic, and aperient; allays
thirst and nausea, and relieves disorders of bile. A. Isilloosoos;
it is the Baboonie.

909 Merch.--"Piper Nigrum, W. Maricha, San. Poivre, F." Pungent,
penetrating, stimulant, carminative; hot and dry; useful in disorders
of mucus, wind, difficulty of breathing, and internal itchiness;
is vermifuge; expels bile, and assists digestion.

910 Merchai.--A name for Hubboneel; hot, dry, and laxative; removes
viscid bile, also mucus and worms.

911 Mursa.--"Amaranthus oleraceus. A potherb." An esculent,
succulent vegetable, which when boiled with salt and butter is sweet,
high-flavored, and aperient.

912 Mernal.--The stem of the Kawul flower.

913 Murorphillie.--"Helieteres Isora." A medicine of
India. P. Kistburkisht (Sheeraree Pechuc); a long twisted shrub,
having a single flower, of a purple color; its leaves resemble the
scorpion's tail; hot and dry in the 2nd degree; some call it hot
in the 1st and dry in the 2nd degree. It assists digestion, and
clears the skin; removes thickened and viscid mucus, and forms an
ingredient in all children's medicines. As an external application,
it is useful in swellings from cold, in itch or daad, expels wind,
and decreases milk or semen; its corrector is Hubbeh senobir; its
succedaneum thrice its weight of Sibr (aloes). Dose one direm.

914 Missie.--A shrub of India, about a yard high; its branches thin
and its leaves like the Kussowndie: its branches are knotted, and when
slit open, an insect is found in them, which is given to the Boolbul,
when training them to fight. Its flower is very small, of a reddish
yellow, like the Gowzeban; it is also called the Kakjunga, q. v.

915 Musoor.--P. Adiess. A common grain of the pea tribe; cool, light,
and astringent; useful in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood, and
is sweet during digestion.

916 Mustchagundka.--A kind of sugar, useful in eruptions from diffused
bile, seminal weakness, delirium, nausea, and thirst.

917 Mukoond.--Sweet to the taste; bitter in digestion; hot and dry;
light; decreases corpulence; induces costiveness and wind; it is a
kind of grain.

918 Muggur.--A. Tumsa. (The Alligator.) Its flesh is greasy and heavy;
used in disorders of wind, and increases mucus and semen.

919 Muko.--A name for Anbus saleb. P. Sugangoor. Very beneficial in
swellings. Its juice is useful in increasing the eyesight, and for
restraining the menstrual flux; cool and moist.

920 Mug Peepul.--A kind of Peepul.

921 Moogta Sukut.--A name for the shell of the pearl-oyster; it is
sweet and pungent, used in mucous disorders, difficulty of breathing,
pains of the chest and bowels, and loss of appetite.

922 Moogtaphill.--A name for the pearl.

923 Mukhara.--Commonly called Mukhana, Euryale ferox. It is cool and
heavy, useful in disorders of wind, mucus, and blood; is aphrodisiac,
and increases semen; and is found very beneficial to women after
labor. It is often called Talmukhana, but it is quite a different
medicine.

924 Mullagheer.--The name of a tree, the wood of which is very heavy,
and full of veins. It is brought from a distance; when pounded,
it is of a reddish black color, has fine smell, and is used in
India for dying and for giving a pleasant odour to clothes. It is
cardiac, strengthens the brain, and gives a pleasant effluvia to the
perspiration; cures discolorations of the skin of the face, and in
some Indian works is called a species of Sandal. Its properties are
the same with Rukutchunden.

925 Mulleka.--A kind of the flower of the Rai-bele: it is hot, light,
aphrodisiac; cures disorders of wind, eruptions of the mouth, and
all affections thereof.

926 Mulleen.--A root of India, of a clay color; hot, dry, and pungent;
if bruised and applied to the head, it kills vermin; it destroys
maggots in ulcers; the leaves possess the same property. I knew a
man who had severe head-aches from maggots in the brain: I squeezed
the juice of this into the nose, it killed and brought them away.

927 Moondie.--A. Raderyoos. "Spheranthus Indicus." It is also called
Tuppodenie, so denominated from its being used in penance; if any one
preserves a constant respect for this, he will become the peculiar
favorite of Heaven. It is also called Srawanie; this name is derived
from the circumstance of its bearing fruit in the month Srawun. The
leaf is somewhat like the mint, the flower round or globulated, and
of a rose-color; it has a sweet smell, and is a medicine of great
virtue. It is sweet and a little bitter, but very much so during
digestion; it is hot, light; increases understanding; is vermifuge;
useful in boils and eruptions of an obstinate nature; is pungent; cures
pains in the parts of generation of the female, marasmus, gonorrhoea,
and disorders of bile. If the plant be pulled out by the root before
it flowers, and dried in the shade, and ate with wheat flour, cow's
ghee, and sugar, it will restore and preserve youth, and prevent the
hair from becoming grey; and if pounded and often used in powder,
it will be found peculiarly tonic. If its seed be ate with sugar,
it will preserve health to the extreme of old age.

An old man is said to have eaten a preparation of this for a year
constantly: the strength of youth was restored to him, and he lived to
the age of 205 years. The physicians of India declare this to be the
basis of the Elixir Vitæ. If the plant is taken before it flowers,
and is bruised and eaten with ghee and honey, both the strength and
appearance of youth will be preserved. Indeed, the extent of its
virtues is only known to the most scientific of physicians. If its
flowers are eaten for 40 days, the same effect will be produced;
and the root used without intermission for a year, incalculable
benefit will be the result. If the root and leaves be bruised and
eaten for three days, with cow's milk and honey, it will be found
highly aphrodisiac. If one of the seeds be swallowed without water,
the eye-sight will be preserved, and no affection of the eyes will
take place for a year. If two are swallowed, the eye-sight will be
preserved for two years, and so on. I used it myself in my infancy,
or early days, and have preserved my sight in a wonderful manner. My
uncle used the distilled water of this, in depression of the spirits,
and as a cardiac, with great success: he sometimes distilled from
equal parts of this and Gowjeban, at other times with other cardiac
medicines. If half a masha of the oil of this be ate with Paan in the
cold weather, it will produce a genial warmth over the body; it will
also remove affections from cold, and be found aphrodisiac. The oil
is thus procured:

The plant is moistened with water, and then rubbed between the
hands with any sweet-scented oil, but not too much; it is then to
be extracted in the same manner as that of Agur is procured. If a
chittack of the following oil be eaten daily for 40 days, and during
this time abstaining from intercourse with woman, it will be found
that the aphrodisiac power will have become so great, that it will
seem wonderful. It is thus prepared:

Take the leaves, root, and all parts of the plant; bruise them,
sprinkling a little water over them; then squeeze out 20 seers of the
juice, and add to it five seers of sweet oil; boil the whole till the
juice shall have evaporated, and the residue is the oil. Some use the
medicine in this manner. During the months of August and September,
with cow's ghee. In April and May, with honey. In June and July, with
sugar. In February and March, with congee. In October and November,
with cow's milk; and in December and January, with sour milk. The
author of the Dhara Shekoi has said that the root is to be bruised in a
copper vessel, with a pestle of the Neeb tree, adding a little water,
till it has become black; then taken up by dipping cotton into it,
and preserved for use. In the ophthalmia, a little of the cotton
moistened and applied to the eye, will remove the disease.


Maadentezerrubad.

Moondie is a medicine of India, of two kinds, a large and small;
its flowers are like buttons, and it is of a bitterish, astringent
taste. It is cool and dry in the 1st degree, and is, in the opinion
of some, in equilibrium: both kinds of it are beneficial in disorders
of the blood, white leprosy, epilepsy, heart-burn, elephantiasis,
cough, incessant vomiting, diarrhoea, flatulence, all disorders of
the eyes, feverish head-ache, itch, heat in the chest, marasmus,
and all bilious disorders; it creates appetite, and is aphrodisiac.

928 Munn.--P. Morhoemarh. A. Hujuroolheya. A stone found in the nape
of the neck of a snake of the Cobra species, but it is not found in
all; when in the reptile, it is soft, but it hardens by exposure to
the air. It has a variegated surface, and its virtues are these,
that if rubbed on a blue or black woollen cloth, it will deprive
the cloth of its color; also, if applied to any part bitten by a
reptile, it will adhere till it shall have extracted the poison. If
it be put into milk, it will change its color. If it is applied to
the bite of a snake, it will extract the poison. And if it be eaten,
no snake can ever by its bite produce hurtful effects on your system.

929 Munsul.--Bitter, pungent, hot, and moist; heavy and aperient;
an antidote to poisons; cures affections of mucus, blood, difficulty
of breathing, and cough; clears the color of the skin, reduces
corpulency; and removes possession by evil spirits. It is called
Zernikh Soorkh. "Red Sulphuret of Arsenic."

930 Moondookpurnie.--A kind of Birumbie.

931 Mundar.--A small shrub, of two kinds; both bitter, pungent, hot,
and laxative; useful in disorders of mucus, and increase of fat in
the abdomen, itch, and swellings; and is an antidote to poisons.

932 Moot.--P. Shasha, or Kumeer. A. Bowl. Urine. That of cows,
buffaloes, horses, goats, camels, rams, and men, is saltish and
bitter; dry, light, aperient, and cardiac; increases appetite and
relish for food; useful in general swellings; clears the brain and
all excretory passages; increases bile; beneficial in disorders of
wind, Badgola, piles, and dropsy; is vermifuge, and used in Juzam,
marasmus, flatulence, internal itchiness, and want of appetite.

Cow's is the best and most effectual. Elephant's urine is an
antidote to poisons, and generally vermifuge; useful in Juzam and
Badgola. Buffalo's, beneficial in swellings, Badgola, piles, marasmus,
and seminal weakness. Horse's is aperient; cures disorders of mucus,
and Daad. Goat's is an antidote to poisons; removes difficulty
of breathing, jaundice, and marasmus. Ram's cures emaciation,
swellings, Juzam, piles, seminal weakness, and costiveness. Ass's is
lithontriptic; useful in seminal weakness, Juzam, idiotism, internal
itchiness, and dropsy, and is vermifuge.

Human urine is an antidote to poison, and particularly tonic. When
a choice is to be made between male and female, this rule may be
observed. Of the cow, sheep, and goat, the female; of elephant, horse,
camel, and ass, the male; also the male of the human subject. Should a
person at any time feel symptoms of indigestion, and be afraid of the
consequences, a little of his own urine will relieve all unpleasant
sensations and expedite digestion, but this can only be resorted to
by people of no caste.

933 Monje.--The leaf and external fibrous covering of a kind of reed
like grass, used to make rope. It is equally cold and hot; useful in
acne, disorders of blood, diseases of the eyes, and all complaints
affecting the urinary bladder, or urethra.

934 Mooser.--Sweet, bitter, heavy; promotes appetite, cures piles
and disorders of wind; increases semen, and is an ingredient in all
tonic prescriptions. I fancy this is the Shukakool.

935 Moocherus.--"Bombax Heptaphyllum. The tree." The gum of the
Sembill tree, also so named by the author of the Dhara Shekoi, but
it is commonly understood to be the flower of the Soopearie tree. It
is cool, heavy, and astringent; increases semen; restrains diarrhoea;
increases the tone of the digestive organs; removes disorders of blood,
bile, mucus, and general heat.


Maadentezerrubad.

Moocherus is of two kinds, one according to some is the gum of the
Sahajena, and by the account of others, that of the Sembill tree. It
is red, heavy, and difficult of digestion. The other kind is the
flower of the Soopearie; both kinds are cool, dry, astringent, and
aphrodisiac; strengthen the back, kidnies, and loins; increase semen,
and lengthen aphrodisia. Its corrector is sugar and cow's ghee. The
succedaneum is Kummarkuss.

936 Mohuk also Bohuk; useful in disorders of mucus and wind, and
slightly increases bile; some have said that this is the Mowa.

937 Mokhun.--The name of a tree, hot and astringent; useful in diseases
of wind and mucus, in worms in the stomach, and pain therefrom,
rheumatic pains in the joints and bones, and its gum is aphrodisiac;
increases the bulk of the muscles, and of use in disorders of bile
and wind.

938 Moong.--"Phaseolus Mungo." And one kind, which grows wild. It
is cool, dry, light, and astringent; used in disorders of mucus and
bile; strengthens the eyes, and is fit and proper food for the sick;
it however weakens the stomach--this I know by experience. If given
to a person of weak digestive organs, it will be passed unchanged,
although other food will be digested. I therefore conclude that it
is too difficult of assimilation to be used with advantage, as here
recommended. It weakens aphrodisia. P. Maash.

939 Moth.--A grain of India; cool; some say in equilibrium. It is
dry, quick of digestion, and if used with cow's ghee, its flavor will
be much improved. It cleanses the blood, is sweet during digestion,
relieves wind, and removes laxities of the bowels; some indeed have
called it aperient: cures mucus disorders, strokes of the wind or sun,
and removes fever. It produces worms.

940 More.--The Peacock? Its flesh is hot, aphrodisiac, and tonic;
beneficial in diseases of the ear, colds, dryness, and creates
appetite; increases understanding, thickens the hair of the
head, strengthens eye-sight, cleans the voice, and beautifies the
complexion. It ought to be ate in the cold season, as it is not so
beneficial in the hot winds and rains. P. Taous.

941 Morba.--A medicine of India. Its root hard, and of a clay color;
hot and dry in the 2nd degree: used as an external application in
swellings of the throat, and one direm of it eaten, it will loosen
phlegm from the throat.

942 Motha.--"Cyperus rotundus. Cyperus pertenuis, Roxb." A name for
Saad; bitter, astringent, and cool; inducing costiveness; assisting
digestion; used in disorders of blood, mucus, bile, and fever;
removes thirst, and is vermifuge.

943 Moom.--Soft and greasy, cures pain of bruises; and boils; assists
the growth of granulations in wounds, and the junction of fractured
bones; useful in affections of wind, blood, and Juzam. A. Shuma.

944 Mookul..--Restrains laxities of the bowels, is heavy and tonic;
useful in disorders of bile and wind, creates appetite, and is very
aphrodisiac.

945 Moolie or Moolug.--Hot and light, creates appetite, clears the
voice, benefits affections of the throat, the olfactory nerves,
and the three secretions; dried, it is light and very beneficial in
piles, swelling, stone and gravel. Salt extracted from the radish
in the usual way, by being dried and burned, is diuretic; useful in
suppressions of urine, and promotes digestion.

946 Motie.--Its properties nearly resembling those of Chunder Kanth,
q. v.

947 Moonga.--A name for Mirjhan; bitter and sweet; useful in disorders
of bile, heat, wind, and mucus; increases semen and is cardiac.

948 Mowlserie.--Mimusops Elengi. Bukool, H. Sweet, astringent, and
cool; causes intoxication, raises the spirits and is an antidote to
poisons. Its flowers have a sweet smell; the fruit is cool, sweet,
and astringent; improves the color of the skin, and imparts a pleasant
taste to the mouth. I have found the fruit to be cardiac and stomachic;
the root is beneficial in seminal weakness, in strengthening the loins,
and increasing the consistence of semen. Its name is also Bowlserie.


Maadentezerrubad.

Bowlserie is cool and dry; its bark and root useful in thickening
semen, and remedying too great seminal irritability: if its bark
is boiled in milk, and as a gargle, it will remove tooth-ache. The
flowers are somewhat hot, cardiac, and stomachic; its distilled water
is intoxicating, and useful in disorders of bile, thirst, and delirium.

949 Mooslee or Mooslicund.--Sweet and cool; removes bile and heat;
increases a proper secretion of mucus, and if eaten with sweet oil,
it will relieve discharges from the nose from cold. Used with rock
salt, it will increase appetite; with water it will remove pains in the
bowels. It is of several kinds: black and white. The former resembles
the Shakakool, but the bark of the Shakakool is white, whereas this
is black; the white kind is thin, and resembles Mahi roobyan, called
also Mooslie Dukanee. Another kind is also white, and thinner than
the black kind, yet thicker than the Dukanee. All three kinds are
used in aphrodisiac formulæ; some have called it hot, and useful in
piles and disorders of wind. If half a direm be taken with Zeera, it
will be found beneficial in Jaundice; and if taken with equal parts
of good ginger, it will cure indigestion. If eaten with the leaves
of Punskisht in equal parts, it will remedy offensive perspiration,
and with Streephill, it will remove seminal weakness; with Peepul,
it will cure Hydrophobia, and with Anula it cures intermittents.


Maadentezerrubad.

Mooslie is of two kinds, black and white; the black is called Mooslie
Dukanee, dry in the first degree, and hot in the second; some say
hot in the first degree and dry in the second. It is aphrodisiac, and
increases semen; removes head-ache from phlegm and seminal weakness, (3
direms with as much of the white of the cocoanut.) In giddiness it is
administered with honey; as a tonic with milk and Isgun; for injuries
of the labiæ and vagina with Darfelfil; for carbuncle with Zemicund;
for dropsy, with camel's milk or Mocoe water. As an antidote to poison,
with Kawanch seed; in quartan ague, with cold water; in Soorkhbad,
with Tirphilla; in habitual fever, with cow's urine; in pains in the
bowels, with hot-water; in the bite of a snake, with sugar, honey,
or Tincar; in deafness, with mint or Kanjee for seven days; in black
jaundice, with Baberung; and for gonorrhoea or diabetes, with water.

In the opinion of the Hindoos, this is the best of all medicines,
and the black kind the most powerful for medicinal purposes.

950 Moorsheka.--A tree, whose leaves growing like the plume of the
peacock, has obtained for it this name. It is sweet and acid; useful
in disorders of bile, wind, mucus, and heat.

951 Mogra.--"Jasminum Zambac. Magorium." A flower very common; sweet
and cool, and of a pleasant smell; raises the spirits; removes bile;
improves weakness of sight, affections of the mouth, and ulcers. There
are seven kinds of it.

952 Musakunie.--A shrub of two kinds, the first rises only about
four inches, more or less, and has on both sides of it two leaves,
like a mouse; the other kind remains on the ground, like the leaf of
the Doodie. Its flower is of a blue color; the first kind is scarce:
both are hot, bitter, and diuretic, and useful in disorders of bile
and mucus; it is called Murzunjoosh.

953 Maha Moondie.--A kind of Moondie, of a larger kind; its flower as
large as the Kudum flower; its properties the same as the Bhoomkudum.

954 Mahwa.--"Bassia latifolia." A tree as large as the mangoe; its
leaves large and thick; its wood used in building, very common to the
eastward. A spirit is distilled from its flower; its fruit is named
Kelownda; the unripe shell of it dressed with meat much improves its
flavor. It is hot and dry. One kind of it is named Rahisphill. The
decoction, the distilled water and spirit, have an offensive smell,
produce giddiness, and much subsequent uneasiness. The flower when
just blown is white, but as it becomes ripe assumes a yellow color
like the Benowlee, but larger, and it is sweet to the taste. The
kernel of its fruit gives an oil of a white color, and is used to
adulterate ghee. Its properties are said to be, that it is useful in
mucus and wind, and cicatrizes wounds.

Its flower is cool and heavy; aphrodisiac; increases the secretion
of milk and semen, also mucus; useful in disorders of bile, blood,
wind, and in hectic fever. Called Goolchukan.

955 Mahkee.--Its flesh is sweet to the taste; hot and moist, also
heavy; useful in disorders of wind, and has a soporific property. It
is aphrodisiac, increases semen, strengthens memory, and preserves
health. It is a name for the buffalo. A. Jamoos.

956 Mohoka.--"Cuculus Castaneus, Buch." A bird, the note of which is
sounded okok, it is also called Uka. Its brain mixed with perfumes,
and used as a cephalic in cases of palsy of the tongue, and paralysis,
produces sneezing, and gives relief. Its blood is used to extract
thorns or heads of arrows from the flesh. Its brain, mixed with sugar
and given to children, produces distinct articulation. The flesh is
said to be hot and dry, and to strengthen memory. Its fæces is used
as a medicine in difficulty of breathing.

957 Mahaneem.--"Melia sempervirens, W. The leaves of this species of
the bead tree have a nauseous taste, devoid of astringency. Flem." Its
taste is bitter and astringent; it is cool and dry; removes laxities
of the bowels; useful in disorders of mucus, bile, and blood. Is
vermifuge; allays vomiting and nausea, and is very powerful in
Juzam. It is commonly called Bucaen. Shaikh Boo Ali Seyna, in his
work called Kanoon, has written, that Azad is the name of a poisonous
tree; and Hakeem Ally has written, that the Azad is the Bucaen tree;
others too have followed him up, and stated it to be the Bucaen: but
as I have repeatedly exhibited the Bucaen, I know that it possesses no
poisonous qualities, consequently this must either be a mistake or a
false statement. In the Moasoodie, it is written, that the Bucaen is a
tree of India, cool, dry, astringent, vermifuge, beneficial in Juzam,
eruptions, disorders of blood, and that it is lithontriptic. If three
direms of the seed in powder be taken, it will be found useful in
piles, and stop the discharge from bleeding piles; a fumigation of
the seeds will also be found useful. The young leaves bruised and
taken will correct an increased discharge of the menstrual flux;
the leaves heated and applied to piles, or the loins in lumbago,
will give great relief, and as an application to boils it exceeds the
Neem in virtue. The seeds bruised and rubbed among the hair will kill
vermin; and the bark burnt, and with equal parts of Kuth, applied to
the mouth, will cure eruptions.

958 Mendi.--A name for Hinna, "Lawsonia Inermis."

959 Mahasutawurie.--A kind of Shatawur.

960 Mahawunth.--A kind of Kudum.

961 Mahameed.--A species of this is called Meede. Both are cool, heavy,
sweet to the taste; improve the senses; are powerfully tonic; increase
milk and semen; are aphrodisiac, increase phlegm, cure eruptions from
cold, cough from bile, but increase cough from phlegm. This medicine
is very scarce, and seldom met with.

962 Mahawur.--Its properties come near those of the Lac. It is useful
in discoloured specks on the face, and acne punctata; bruised and
introduced into the ear, it cures the ear-ache.

963 Mendi Anwul.--A kind of Anwul.

964 Mayursuka.--Light; cures disorders of bile and mucus, and restrains
laxities of the bowels.

965 Mayoorshuka.--The Moorshuka.

966 Mendha.--P. Meshe. Its flesh is heavy, moist, tonic; increases
wind and bile. This is the name of the male, and his meat is preferable
to the female. "Ram."

967 Mynphill.--"Gardenia Dumetorum, Köen. Vangueria Spinosa,
Roxb." Bitter and hot, astringent and dry, light and emetic; useful
in disorders of mucus and Juzam, swellings, flatulence, and dryness
of the seven Dhats, Badgola, and is suppurating.

968 Methie.--"Trigonella Foenum-græcum, Wild." Hot and dry; exhilarates
the spirits; creates appetite; induces costiveness; is vermifuge, and
decreases semen. Its seed is useful in cough, nausea, and disorders
of mucus. A. Hoolba.

969 Mydhasingie.--A kind of Doodie.

970 Myoorjung.--A name for Aoloo; obtains its name from its stem
resembling in straightness the peacock's leg.

971 Meed.--Vide Mahameed.

972 Meetanimboo.--Called also, Rajenimboophill, and in
P. Shukurleemboo.

973 Nalee or Narie.--A small plant, which lies on the ground. Its
leaves somewhat like the tamarind leaf. In some works the Narie is
separately described. Its qualities are hot, and it is discutient;
useful in affections of wind from cold; is laxative and beneficial
in disorders of the mouth.

974 Naryil.--"Cocos nucifera." A tree like the Taar or Khoojoor;
its fruit is oval, and betwixt that and its covering is a fibrous
substance in considerable quantities; its weight from half a rittal
to one or more. It is cool; slow of digestion; expels gravel;
induces costiveness; is aphrodisiac and tonic; useful in disorders
of wind, blood, bile, general heat; and its water is cool, light
and cardiac; increases appetite and semen. If not quickly drunk,
and has become fermented, it produces some degree of intoxication,
raises the spirits, and is tonic. Its cheese, when first produced,
resembles milk, and is said to be very sweet; it afterwards becomes
hardened, and increases semen, wind, and disorders of bile. Bullienas,
a physician, has related, that if a torch is made of the rind and
coir, and burnt in the midst of a large company, it will produce so
soporific an effect as to put them all to sleep.

975 Naringee.--Some have stated this to be a name for Narinje, but
this is a mistake; it is produced in Indostan. Its properties are
less powerful than Sungterra or Kowla, but its acid greater.

"Narinje is the Citrus Aurantium, or Nagaranga, San. Rind stomachic;
juice acid and bitter."

976 Nagesur.--"Mesua ferrea." Indian rose chestnut? A seed smaller than
the Kubabcheenee; the plant is thin, and its stem long. It is dry,
light, corrects indigested food; cures or removes offensive smell
from the perspiration; useful in Juzam, acne, mucus, and poisons;
it is said to be a name for Narmusk.

977 Nagdown.--Mugwort? Cures boils and eruptions, and is an antidote
to the poison of spiders and snakes. A. Huleyoon, Artemisia Vulgaris.

978 Nagdumnie.--A wood resembling a snake, from which it obtains its
name. It coils round like the snake, and may easily be mistaken for
that reptile. It is bitter; increases the size of the muscles; is tonic
and light; used in disorders of bile and mucus, gonorrhoea, eruptions,
Lues Venerea, and poisons; it remedies laxities of the bowels.

979 Murdok.--A shrub, found in the hills; its leaves like those of
the cucumber, its root called Davaun nemr. The leopard eats the root,
which produces a swelling near its tail on the back: this is called
Hadjurun nemr. P. Nirkpulung. This if bruised, and applied to the
carbuncle, will expedite its cure; and if a woman applies it to the
parts of generation, she will not conceive; and if her husband visits
another woman after having been with her, she will not conceive. It
is a runnet, and coagulates milk. If preserved about your person,
and you visit a baker's shop, the bread will fall from the oven into
the fire. It is about the size of a clove of garlic, and is variegated
on its surface like the skin of the tiger.

980 Nadey.--A species of Jamin.

981 Nagarmotha.--A name for Motha. Cyperus Pertenuis.

982 Nagbulla.--Sweet, acid, and astringent; hot and slow of digestion;
useful in itch and ulcers, also in disorders of bile.

983 Naaoe.--A common shrub, very hot; useful in disorders of wind
and mucus; produces appetite; assists digestion. Its leaves used as
a culinary vegetable.

984 Nirbissie.--A name for Jedwar. "Curcuma Zedoaria. Amomum
Zedoaria. Kempferia Rotunda." Sp. ch. Spikes lateral, bulbs small,
with long yellow palmated tubers; leaves broad-lanceolar, sub-sessile
on their sheath, sericeous underneath; color uniform green. Banhildie;
pungent and cool; useful in disorders of wind, mucus, blood, and every
kind of poison. Is tonic; carminative; useful in flatulent cholic,
but it increases ulcers.

985 Nerkutchoor.--See Kutchoor.

986 Nergoondie.--Resembles Rootki, but smaller and black. The author of
the Ulfaz has without due enquiry pronounced this to be the Sumhaloo,
but this is a different plant. It is hot and dry, useful in disorders
of mucus.

987 Neyrmellie.--"Strychnos Potatorum, W. Cataca, San." It is cool
and dry, some say it is in equilibrium. If bruised and mixed with foul
water, it will clear, and purify it. If bruised in water, and applied
to the umbilicus, it will relieve the griping pain of dysentery. If
bruised, and applied to the eyes, it will strengthen eye-sight; also
if applied to the bite of a snake, it will remove the effects of the
poison. If eight grains of it be mixed with a little water and sugar,
and drank, it will be found beneficial in gonorrhoea. I have seen this
in my uncle's receipt book, but the dose was not there specified. If
four grains of this be bruised in water, and mixed with dhaie, and
left in a covered China vessel for a night, and taken in the morning,
it will relieve suppression of urine, gonorrhoea, chordee, and bloody
urine; but it must be used for a week.

988 Niswut or Mahaseyama, or Ritchita. It is a little bitter and
sweet; also bitter during digestion. It is hot and dry; laxative;
relieves wind; useful in fever, disorders of bile, mucus, dropsy,
and swellings. The black kind is a poison and very hurtful; it is a
powerful drastic purgative; produces insensibility, heat, giddiness,
and injures the voice.

989 Nuk Is of two kinds, both sweet to the taste; hot and light;
removes possession by evil spirits; beneficial in disorders of wind,
mucus, and blood; is an antidote to poisons; cardiac, and clears the
complexion, called Uzfarooteeb.

990 Nukchecknie.--A name for Koondush. It is a low shrub, does not
rise from the ground; its leaves like the Tirrateruk; its flower
like the Neemb. It produces eruptions in the mouth, beneficial in
disorders of wind and phlegm, and is vermifuge. It is called Chicknie.


Maadentezerrubad.

Nukchikenie is a medicine of India, hot and dry; expels wind;
beneficial in mucus, paralysis, and paralytic complaints, loss of
memory, pains in the joints, and is aphrodisiac. If one seer of this
with quarter seer of sweet oil, and half the weight of Mulkungnie,
be put into an earthen vessel, and its oil extracted in the manner
described under the head Puttaljuntur, and given in the quantity of
four soorkhs in Paan, it will be useful in all the above-mentioned
complaints, and in all mucous disorders. It will be advisable to
use this medicine only in the cold weather, as it is, in itself,
very hot and powerful.

991 Nullwa.--Cool; strengthens the eye-sight; useful in bilious
disorders, affections of the blood, Juzam, difficulty of voiding urine,
general heat, mucus, and acne.

992 Null or Nullie; grows in watery and moist places; it is cool, and
useful in disorders of the eyes, in eruptions of the mouth or apthæ;
clears the blood; clears and dries the vagina, and is diuretic. Some
have called it heating.

993 Nemuk Chitchera Is thus made. Take two bundles of that kind
of Chitchera, which has inverted prickles, reduce it to ashes, and
collect them into a vessel; then add a great quantity of water, and
mix and wash it well with the hand; leave it for a night, add more
water, put it into a cloth, and let it strain through slowly by drops;
boil the clear fluid till the salt will precipitate or crystallize.

994 Nemuk Soonchur also called Nemuk Sia. "Muriate of
soda. Bitlaban. Kala Nemuck, H." A tonic in dyspepsia or gout; a
deobstruent in obstructions of the spleen and mysenteric glands of
children; a stimulant in chronic rheumatism and palsy; a vermifuge. An
analysis of the black salt gave,

"Black oxide of iron, six grains; sulphur, 14 grains; muriate of
lime, 12 grains; muriate of soda, 444 grains; loss four grains =
480 grains." It is thus prepared: Take two seers of Anula, one seer
of Ashkhur, bruise both and mix them with 20 seers of rock-salt,
also bruised; put the whole into a vessel, cover the vessel with a
cloth, all except the mouth; lute this cloth well with soft clay,
and place it in the sun to dry. When perfectly dry, put it on the
fire, (let the mouth of the vessel be rather small.) Keep constantly
stirring it with an iron spatula or spoon; when well boiled and mixed,
take it off and allow it to cool; then add Tinkhar, Jawakhar, Tilkh,
Kibreeth, sweet salt, and soot, equal parts; mix all well together,
and add a quantity of salt-water; then boil the whole down, and strain
as directed under the head Nemuk Chitchera.

995 Nemuk Kutchloon.--The salt of glass, called Muskhoo Koonia, also
Zoobdat ul Kawareer. It is the froth of glass; it creates appetite;
clears the blood: there is another kind of salt called Budhloon. This
is hot and stomachic; restrains laxities of the bowels, pains, and
consequent swellings of the urinary bladder, heaviness, and stuffing
of the chest, disorders of wind and mucus; also expels wind.

996 Nemuk Udhbidh.--The common Unkaloon; this is a kind of black
salt; it is light; clears the blood; it is speedy in its effects,
and as an external application, and it expels wind.

997 Nemuk Soendha.--Sweet to the taste; cool, moist, and light;
promotes appetite and digestion. Is cardiac, strengthens vision,
and is useful in wind and bile.

998 Nekund Baaperi.--A medicine of India, called also Oontura or
Anere. It is hot and moist. If used as much as can be held in the
palm of the hand, for a year, no poison will prove hurtful; in fact it
counteracts the poison of snakes, and all other poisons. If two direms
be eaten with as much aniseseed, for six months, the hair will not
become white; two direms ate with dhaie, will be found effectual in
gonorrhoea. Eaten with the leaves of the lime tree, and four seeds of
peepul, it will cure obstinate fevers; with goat's milk, will cure
quartans; with Foifil for three months, will cure white leprosy,
also foulness of the blood, Juzam, boils, and scabies.

999 Nundbyrchun or Nundbyrkha. Hot and light, and in its properties
resembling the peepul; indeed it is reckoned a species of that
tree. It is useful in disorders of mucus, blood, poisons, boils,
and cuticular eruptions.

1000 Nunahuld.--The small turmeric, called also Mameeran.

1001 Newarrie.--A flower in India, like the Chumbeley, but has no
smell. It is of two kinds, one procured in the hot season, the other
in the rains; the second kind is also called Newalie. Both are pungent,
light, and useful in disorders of all the secretions.

1002 Nowsader.--"Muriate of Ammonia. Sal Ammoniac, F. Salmiak, G. Sale
Ammoniaco, I. Sal Ammoniaco, Sp. Also Nowshader"; very pungent salt,
and as a medicine or application, speedily effectual. It is aperient,
beneficial in cholics, dropsy, costiveness, and pains in the bowels.

1003 Nowllee.--The young leaves of the lime tree; they have a sweet
and grateful smell.

1004 Neeturbala.--Cool, dry, and light; produces appetite and
digestion; cures eruptions of diffused bile; bilious and mucous
disorders, general heat, boils, and eruptions. Some say, that this is
the Nalee, but this is a mistake, for Nalee is the name of a different
medicine, though it may be that of both. As the Neeturbala is seldom
met with, a substitute is used in the branches of the Neelophir, dried.

1005 Neela Totha.--P. Tootia Subs. It is of two kinds, both aperient,
and useful in scabies and Juzam, disorders from poison, and mucus;
is vermifuge; reduces corpulency, and is useful in certain diseases
of the eye.

1006 Neenuk.--Its flesh is sweet to the taste; light, tonic, and
aphrodisiac; useful in disorders of the three secretions. It is a
kind of Barasingha.

1007 Newla.--In its properties resembling those of the cat. A. Ibn
Urs. "The mongoose, Ichneumon, Viverra Ichneumon."

1008 Neelkunt.--"Coracias Bengalensis." A bird; its meat is useful
in disorders of mucus, wind, and blood. P. Subsuk.

1009 Neendie.--"Vitex Nigundo, W. Lagondium Litorium, Rump. Bhemnosi,
Rheede. Vitex Trifolia. The leaves heated are discutient, effectual in
dispelling inflammatory swellings of the joints from acute rheumatism,
and of the testicles from suppressed gonorrhoea."

1010 Neela Sindhuk.--A name for Sumhaloo, (Sobaloo?) P. Punjkysht. A
kind of the above; both are bitter to the taste, astringent, pungent,
and light; increase knowledge; strengthen vision; also strengthen the
hair of the head; remove itchiness of the abdomen and swellings; are
vermifuge; useful in Juzam, boils, eruptions, and disorders of mucus;
improve appetite, and relieve cataract. The leaves of the Sumhaloo,
smoked as tobacco, or equal parts of them and tobacco bruised and
applied to the part, will cure hydrocele.

1011 Nypaul.--A kind of Chureyta, called also Nupaul Neeb.

1012 Neenboo.--P. Lymboo. Citrus Medica, W. Jambira, S. Refrigerant,
antiseptic. Peel stomachic. The Lime. It ripens in the hot-weather, and
attains the size of a hen's egg. It is of a green yellowish color. Its
rind is very thin, and thence it derives its name Kagsi. One kind of
it is always in fruit, and a sweet kind of it is called Rajineenboo
phill. Its properties are particularly noticed in Yunani works. It
is said in some publications to be an antidote to animal poisons,
both internally used, and applied to the parts.

1013 Neel.--The indigo, very common in India; hot and bitter; useful
in boils, affections of the spleen, Soorkhbad, dropsy, strengthening
the hair of the head; but it weakens memory, and produces giddiness.

Its leaves are used as an application for colouring the hair, and
are in great estimation on that account. From its heating quality, it
either decreases or increases a discharge from the nose, according to
its nature; and when it is used for colouring the hair of the beard,
cloves ought to be mixed with it, to increase its heating quality,
when the person is of a cold temperament.

1014 Neelisbund.--A kind of Apirchetta, q. v.

1015 Neeb.--"Melia Azedirachta, W. The pride of India, the leaves of
a nauseous bitter taste, (devoid of astringency,) Flem."

A very common and large tree of India, much esteemed; it is of four
kinds, the medicinal properties of all the same. It is astringent
and bitter; pungent and cool, (some say hot and dry;) some call
its qualities in equilibrium; it is quick of digestion; useful in
disorders of bile, wind, and mucus, and I have known it to be of use
in Juzam and white leprosy. I have also exhibited it with success in
eruptions and scabies. One man I knew, whose whole body was white from
leprosy. I prescribed it to him for 40 days, and cured him. I took
the kernel of the seed, bruised and sifted it, and gave it in the
quantity that might be contained in the palm of his hand, fasting,
and prohibited him from using any other kind of food than bread or
dhal, without salt or ghee.

It is also said by Hukeem Ali to be excellent in curing obstinate old
ulcers, as also fistula in ano, by the application of its leaves. It is
given in many and various ways. Its leaves are given fresh, sometimes
dried and pounded, sometimes its juice is given, often the juice of
the leaf buds, and not unfrequently its bark. It is likewise given
mixed with Noora. Its juice is used with Noora to cleanse foul ulcers,
and to cure carbuncle, and this it effects in a very short time. The
Noora is added to it in one-eighth of its quantity, and Hukeem Ali has
declared it to be the best ingredient in ointment that he ever tried.

I have often used the leaves heated as an application to swellings and
boils; it in some cases resolved them, in others expedited suppuration,
and in all was beneficial. I have added salt to the bruised leaves
for the same purpose, and found that it added to its efficacy.

A decoction of the leaves as a fumigation is excellent in discussing
swellings, and with the addition of the leaves of the Sumhaloo, with
additional good effect. A fumigation of less heating properties may
be obtained by the leaves of the Anbassaleb, being substituted for
the Sumhaloo. The water of this decoction is useful in cleansing foul
ulcers, and removing pain from the joints.

The Neeb in the opinion of Indian physicians is cool, and Hukeem
Urzanee has described its qualities as equal. If the decoction is
used as a wash for the hair, it will darken its color, and increase
its growth; and if the juice of its young leaves in the quantity of
five or six direms be taken for seven days, it will cure scabies,
ring-worm, and all kinds of acne, and it will purify the blood. A
decoction of the bark of its root will restore suppressed menses,
and if taken with goor it will produce abortion: prepared in this
manner it will cure the under-mentioned diseases.

Take of the flower, seed, bark of the root, and leaves (called Punjuk),
let them be infused for a night in two maunds of water, then bury it
in the ground for a month, after which distil its water for use.

All species of scabies, white leprosy, Juzam, (when not too far
advanced,) and disorders of all the secretions. Some mix the Punjuk of
the Bucaen with the above, and it is said to increase its virtues. If
the seed be bruised in water, and applied to the head, it will remove
head-ache. Its juice is vermifuge. If three masha of the leaf buds
with half masha of black peepul be eaten for 21 days, it will remove
disorders and foulness of blood; increase the strength of vision, and
by its juice being introduced into the eyes, will cure night-blindness.

I have given it for cleansing the blood, correcting vitiated bile,
scabies, idiotism, and all disorders arising from disordered bile,
thus: By mixing the distilled water, above-mentioned, with filings of
Sissoo, the leaves, flowers, and bark of the Bucaen, and Shatirra, and
Surphonka, white Sandal, filed, and Gowzeban, mixed well, and a water
distilled. It will also be found useful in Juzam and white leprosy.

1016 Neelobe.--The Saruss.

1017 Neelgau.--"The Wild Cow, (a species of Elk.)" Its size is somewhat
between a horse and ass. Its meat is greasy, hot, and moist; sweet;
increases the secretion of semen; also bile, and eruptions of the
apthous kind. It is also called Rooja. A. Bakur ul Vaish.

1018 Nainjooth.--A name for Mameeran.

1019 Neelkunti.--A small shrub of India; its leaves thick in a middling
degree; its root and flower is blue: also another kind, which grows
in gardens, is called by this name. Its properties are not known to me.

1020 Vaasun.--Called also Bootee Shaikh Fureed, which also signifies
a hill.

1021 Vcherkhar.--A name for Nowshakur, also Nowshader; some call
this a composition, and some say it is the salt Zakoom, made by the
branches being cut small, burnt, and prepared.

1022 Veedoorie also Bedoorie. A. Ynoolhur. It is commonly known by
the name Sahroonia; hot, acid, and useful in cholics.

1023 Veroojun.--Also Beroojun. The author of the Kasmi has described
this as a small stone, or a name for any small stone; some describe
it as a kind of Jewaheer.

1024 Harsinghar.--"Nyctanthes Arbor Tristis;" also called
Hursinghar. It grows to about a man's height, and when at the very
highest, is about 12 feet, though some have seen it even higher. Its
leaves are pointed, thick, and hard; its flowers small and white;
their stem red. Its leaves rubbed on ring-worm cure the affection:
first scaling the part, then healing. It is cool and light; useful in
disorders of wind, mucus, and bile. It is aphrodisiac, and re-unites
broken bones.

1025 Haloon.--"The seed of the Cress, or Lepidium Sativum." The seed of
the Agur; it is smaller than the seed of the Tookbalingha, but thicker,
and of a red color; it is aphrodisiac and tonic; removes hiccup,
wind, mucus, and disorders of the blood. It is hot and dry. A. Hurf.

1026 Hudhjora.--The flower of the Hursinghar; it produces the re-union
of fractured bones, from which property it derives its name. "Cissus
quadrangularis."

1027 Hoorhoora.--A small plant, with many flowers, of a white color,
and very small: one kind of it is called Burumseerjela. The first
kind is cool, heavy, and diuretic; useful in disorders of mucus and
wind. The second is hot and light; useful in seminal weakness and
fever; and is lithontriptic, and removes difficulty of voiding urine.

1028 Hurunkherie or Hurunkhoorie. A small plant of India; its leaves
resembling a deer's hoof, which has given it this title. It is usually
found in wheat fields; it is hot, and aperient; useful in scabies,
Juzam, and loss of sensation. If one direm fresh be eaten with 10
grains of black-pepper, bruised, daily, it will restore lost sensation.

1029 Hurtaal.--"The yellow Sulphuret of Arsenic. Orpiment." Pungent
and astringent; hot and dry; useful in disorders from poison, scabies,
Juzam, aphthæ, disorders of the blood, mucus and bile, fever, and
possession with evil spirits. It is a common application in scabies,
and is called Zernikh Zerd. It is of five kinds, yellow, red, green,
white, and black. The yellow is called Hurtaal, and the white kind is
used by alchymists in the transmutation of metals; it is in the opinion
of every one hot and dry in the 3rd or 4th degree; its corrector is
milk and cow's ghee; its dose four ratties, after it is killed or
prepared, and is thus much esteemed as a medicine in disorders from
cold, such as paralysis, epilepsy, affections of the joints, Juzam, and
white leprosy. It is aphrodisiac, and increases appetite and digestion.


It is thus prepared for use in Leprosy.

Take one tolah of yellow arsenic, wash it seven times in milk, then
grind it for 24 hours, adding as it dries, a little milk, then let
it dry a little, and make it up into small pills. Then take half
seer of the Bhurr Tree (the bark), pound it, and put it in a vessel,
and among the powder put the pills with a little Chunam (lime), above
and below them; after this, shut the vessel so well up that no smoke
can escape, put it on the fire, and keep it in a strong heat for six
hours; then opening the vessel, pour in over the pills a little ghee
(butter), to cool them. The dose will be one soorkh daily, for seven
days, abstaining from any thing salt.


Another method.

Take half a tolah of Hurtaal Tubki, bruise it, and grind it with
milk or the juice of the castor; form it into pills as above. Then
take of Dharafilfil half a tolah, bruise, and use it in lieu of the
chunam above alluded to; form the pile of 15 pieces of cow-dung in a
hole dug in the ground, on these lay the pills, supported and covered
with the Dharafilfil; over them place an equal number of pieces of
cow-dung, and set fire to the whole. When it is cold, take out the
pills, and preserve them for use. Dose half Soorkh.


Another method.

Take of the Hurtaal half a direm, bruise and grind it with the juice
of the Kobee, for six hours, then form it into pills, place them in
an earthern vessel well luted, then surround it with 10 pounds of
dried cow-dung, set it on fire, and when cool, remove them. The dose
one grain or barley corn. Salt prohibited. Given in Paan.


Another method.

Take of Hurtaal half a direm, tie it up in a cloth, and let it remain
for seven days in cow's urine, again for the like period in lime juice,
and an equal number of days in milk of Mudar. The two first liquids
are during the seven days to be twice changed, the last changed daily;
then take out the Hurtaal, and grind it with milk of Mudar for six
hours, form them into pills, and roast them as recommended in the
two foregoing methods. The dose the same.


Another method.

Take of Hurtaal one direm, the kernel of the Kurinjua one direm,
Alum one direm; first bruise the Kurinjua and strew the half of it
over an earthern vessel, with equal parts of Shibyemánie; then put
over it the Hurtaal, and above that the alum; above all these, put
the remainder of the Kurinjua; secure the whole as in the last method,
and roast with 14 pounds of the dried cow-dung.

1030 Hyrbee.--A root of a yellow color; hot, dry, and aperient;
useful in disorders of bile, mucus, and viscidities of the secretions;
its dose is from one dang. to half a direm.

1031 Harun.--A name for Myrg.

1032 Hurr.--"Terminalia Chebula, W. The unripe fruit Zengi
Hur, H. Myrobalans, Terminalia Citrina." A name for Hulélá; its
properties particularly described in Yunani works: astringent, sweet,
laxative. Dose one of the fruits.

1033 Hurbarheorhi.--"Averrhoa acida, Linn. Cicca disticha,
Gmel. Phyllanthus Cheramela, Roxb."

Or Húrfúrhéorhi; a common plant; the acid fruit of which is used
for preserves.

1034 Husthkool.--A kind of Baer, of a middling size.

1035 Husthal.--A kind of Pendhaloo.

1036 Husthuk.--A name for Arnd.

1037 Husthchinkhar.--A name for Kharkhusuk.

1038 Huldee called also Huld; it is pungent and bitter, hot and dry;
useful in disorders of mucus, bile, blood, acne, seminal weakness,
swellings, marasmus, and boils. It may be applied in small quantities
externally, bruised, for the cure of bruises. P. Zerdchooba. A kind
of this is called An'bèhuldie, "Curcuma longa."

1039 Huldia.--The name of a yellow poison; vide Hurtaal.

1040 Hoolhool.--"Cleome viscosa." A plant, about a yard high,
more or less; its leaves are small and thin towards the branches;
its seed-vessel is very thin, and contains numerous small black
seeds. It is round, and bent in the centre; it is used as a culinary
vegetable. It is hot and pungent; useful in cholic, dropsy, ulcers, and
ear-aches; swellings, Juzam, and white leprosy. Its leaves, introduced
into the ear, very useful in ear-ache. It is also beneficial in the
piles; the parts being washed with a decoction of its leaves. In this
complaint, the leaves are dressed and eaten with rice; five direms of
seed ate with twice its weight of sugar before meals, and the meal to
consist of Kitcheree, with plenty of ghee, (butter,) used for 40 days,
will effectually remove piles.

1041 Huldoo.--The name of a tree; the wood of which is used in
buildings; its properties mentioned under the head Darhuld.

1042 Hingote.--A tree; hot in its properties; useful in Juzam, boils,
and eruptions; is an antidote to poisons, and to possession by evil
spirits; beneficial in white leprosy and worms in the stomach. Its
fruit is the size of the large Hurrhoe, and even larger, though when
dried it remains about that size. The tree is about the size of a
small Neeb tree.

1043 Hunspeedie.--A small shrub, growing close to the ground;
its branches thin; its leaves small like the Doodie; it is cool and
heavy; useful in disorders of blood, poisons, boils, eruptions, acne,
general heat, and possession by evil spirits. It induces costiveness,
and is used to counteract the effects of poison of the Tarantula.

1044 Hingpootrie.--It is of two kinds, both pungent and saltish;
hot and cardiac; assist digestion; beneficial in pains at the heart,
and of the urinary bladder; induces costiveness; remedies piles,
disorders of mucus, and Badgola.

1045 Huns.--The flesh is hot and moist; heavy and aphrodisiac; clears
the voice and complexion; promotes appetite; beneficial in Soorkhbad
and disorders of bile. P. Haaz.----Goose.

1046 Hhoobaer.--A seed about the size and color of the Phalsa,
sometimes larger; it is said, that when young, it is red, and when
ripe it becomes black. It is a kind of hill Serroe; its leaves like
the Jhow. In its taste, it is pungent and bitter, astringent and hot,
heavy, and beneficial in disorders of wind, bile, dropsy, and piles;
is lithontriptic and vermifuge, and in the quantity of three direms,
it expedites the expulsion of the dead foetus e utero. It will cure
suppression of the menses, but if ate during pregnancy, will produce
abortion. A. Abhul.

1047 Heeng.--Pungent and saltish, also hot; promotes appetite and
digestion; beneficial in disorders of wind, mucus, internal itchiness,
Badgola, flatulence, and pains in the bowels; is vermifuge; increases
bile, and is aphrodisiac. It increases the power of all tonics and
aphrodisiac prescriptions, but the particulars I have mentioned in
my other works.

1048 Heeraclokhi. A. Dummul Echwder.

1049 Heerakussees.--A kind of Chund Kussees.

1050 Heera.--The name for Almass.

1051 Haimowtie.--A name for Hurrh.

1052 Habooka.--A denomination for Hhoobaer.

1053 Hingool.--A name for Shungirf.








SENSATIONS OF BURNING IN THE HANDS AND FEET.

This is of two kinds, a dry, and a sweating, kind. The method of cure
among the natives is as follows:


Sweating kind.

Take of Chook, Khoot, Lahoria Nemuk, each two parts; Black Till Oil,
12 parts; mix and rub in for 14 days.


Dry kind.

Let a hole be dug in the earth, and fire kindled therein, till the
ground becomes well heated; strew the bottom of the excavation with
Mudar leaves, and sprinkle on them new milk, till the fumes arise. The
feet to be placed in the hole, on the leaves, and a blanket to be
spread over, and round the knees, to prevent the escape of the heated
vapour. In this manner the patient is to sit till the place becomes
cold; and this is to be repeated for seven days, when the cure will
be complete.



In the opinion of the Physicians of Hindostan, the human frame is
divided into seven principal parts. These are chyle, blood, muscles,
fat, bones, brain, marrow, and semen.




THE TASTES ARE SIX: VIZ.


Sweet,        Increasing        Semen, milk, eye-sight, asthma,
                                obesitas, worms, and affections
                                of the throat.
              Curing            Wind and bile.
                                Cool and stomachic; creating appetite.
Acid,         Increasing        Mucus, bile, emaciation, fermentation
                                of the blood.
              Curing            Wind.
Salt,         Increasing        Appetite, digestion, mucus, bile,
                                wind, and disorders of blood.
              Curing            or decreasing aphrodisia, and
                                generally relaxant.
                                Light.
Bitter,       Increasing        Bile, wind, dryness, and heat.
              Decreases         Milk.
                                Dry and light.
Pungent,      Increases         Appetite and milk.
              Decreases         Thirst and fever.
                                Dry.
Astringent,   Increases         Wind and flatulence.
              Decreases         Wounds, ulcers, and laxities.


The general prescriptions and favorite formulæ, mentioned throughout
the work, are Tonics, which preserve health, lengthen life, and
strengthen the system.



The principal secretions or humours are four in number; viz. mucus
(or phlegm), bile, wind, and blood. When three of these are said to
be increased or diminished, it is to be understood, that blood is not
to be included. In fact, it never is, unless particularly specified.




DEGREES.

"The Yunani physicians, in specifying the different degrees of virtue,
or power of their medicines, include in the

"First Degree.--All those whose effects are not felt in common doses.

"Second Ditto.--Such medicines as have perceptible effects; but in
a moderate degree.

"Third Ditto.--Those of greater power, the exhibition of which must
be conducted with caution.

"Fourth Ditto.--All poisons or medicines of any deleterious
properties."




WEIGHTS.

  One soorkh---- one grain.
  One masha----  8 soorkh.
  One direm----  3 masha.
  10 mashas----  one tolah or Rupee.
  One rittal is about 19 tolahs and two mashas.
  One tolah, 12 1/2 mashas.




ABBREVIATIONS.

H. Hindi, P. Persian, A. Arabic, S. Sanscrit, F. French, G. German,
I. Italian, S. Spanish.








INDEX.


A.

Art.
Aak, 8
Aal, 9
Aaont, 83
Abbasie, 657
Abbea, 19
Abi, 7
Abnoos, 15
Abruc, 18
Aderuck, 29
Aditt Bagut, 10
Adjan or Adjain, 26
Adjmode, 22
Adjwain, 23
Adjwain, (Khorasanee,) 24
Adki, 4
Aechill, 89
Aegoor, 88
Aent, 90
Aginmunt, Agwunt, 50
Agunie Char, 55
Agur, 54
Agust, 51
Ahmlee, also Buzuroolreshad, 87
Aistallkund, 41
Akaholie, 3
Akasbele, 56
Akhroat, 52
Akirkirra, or Akirkirrhà, 53
Akroat, 52
Alaechee, 59
Aloo, (Bochara,) 14
Alsi, 57
Alta, 60
Am, Ambe, Anbe, 1
Amarbele, 66
Ambarae, 65
Ambaray, or Ambara, 78
Ambegool, or Angool, or Ambegooda, 73
Ambeloona, 72
Amlie, 63
Amratuck, 68
Amroude, 67
Amrutphull, 64
Amulbedh, 61
Amulchangerie, 62
Amultas, also Kurwara, 69
Ananass, also Kutel Suffrie, 70
Anar, 76
Anbertasung, 80
Anbihildee, 16
Andaluck, 28
Anderjow, 75
Angud, 81
Anjeer, 82
Ankaloon, 79
Anula, or Amle, 5
Anwul, 12
Aoloo, 58
Aoode Belao, 84
Aoonk, 86
Aoont Kutara, 85
Aord, or Aort, or Maash, 32
Aorde Gunta, 40
Aoshire, Kuss Kuss, Ooseer? 47
Aotungun, 20
Apheem, 49
Apurjeeta, 17
Aramsheetul, 2
Area, 11
Arhir, or Toor, 31
Arjun, 36
Arloo, Catoombura, or Sheunag, 37
Armeede, 39
Arnd, 34
Arné, 33
Arnee, 30
Aru, 6
Aruk, 13
Arusa, 35
Arvie, or Arum Colocasia, 38
Asgund, 43
Asperuk, 42
Asphill, Padmunie, 44
Aspurka, 46
Asteghoon, 48
Astull, Buntàki, 45
Atees, 21
Aunalie, 77


B.

Baag, 108
Babchee, or Bakchee, 102
Babool, 126
Baboona, or Marehtee, 113
Babur, 104
Badgan, Khutay 115
Badjera, 122
Baeberung, 121
Baele, also Byll, 271
Bagerie, 185
Baluka, 95
Balchur, 120
Bale, 270
Bander, 107
Banjkakóra, 98
Bans, 114
Bansa, also Piábansa 94
Barasinga, 105
Baraykund, or Keetkuroódh, or Subbuskund, 97
Barehie, 117
Baremoo, 116
Barumbie or Soonputtie, 163
Batassa, 134
Batees, 138
Bealduntuck, 279
Bear, also Konar, 276
Beekhbans, or Beedjbans, 93
Beerbahootie, 281
Becktindeek, 189
Bedareekund, 149
Bedarkee, 150
Bedhara, 152
Beechnak, 148
Beedjbund, 266
Bejoura, 145
Belaikund, 191
Benowla, 212
Benth, 267
Berahumie, 175
Berahumnie, or Berrumdundie, 174
Berchakund, 162
Berehta, or Berehti, 166
Beridda, 160
Bhaer, also Mendha, 237
Bhains, also Mahaki, 238
Bhang, also Bidjia, 248
Bhangra, 230
Bhapungi, 254
Bharingee, 236
Bhateele, 257
Bhehi, 244
Bhelawj, 242
Bhendi, 250
Bheria, also Bhudda, 239
Bheroza, also Gundha Bheroza, 256
Bhindalæ, 252
Bhoeperus, 247
Bhohphilly, 262
Bhoje Puttur, also Burje Puttur 232
Bhoodill, 258
Bhoom Kajoor, 243
Bhoom Kudum, 249
Bhoothpees, 259
Bhoom Amulek, 233
Bhuhira, 241
Bhuiteroor, 246
Bhuntaki, 264
Bhu'th Kutaeye, 261
Billie, 194
Billoousseeke, 195
Bindaal, 216
Bindeokurkotheki, 217
Birnaoo, or Buroo, 158
Biscopra, 177
Bishash, 182
Bishnookrantha, 181
Bitchoo, 144
Bole, 227
Boochitter, or Beechittúr, 245
Boont, 223
Bokun, or Bookla or Book, 183
Buckree, 188
Budgerkund, also Soorum, 147
Budhill, 151
Budjaesaar, 143
Bukaen, 186
Bukochie, 184
Bulka, 198
Bunbele, 203
Bunda, 199
Bunpowarie, 207
Bunslochun, 210
Burberi, 164
Bureeja, 165
Burrh, 157
Burruntaaki, 171
Buryara, 170
Bussunti, 180
Butaer, 137
Butch, 146
Butchudder, 142
Butela, 136
Buthua, or Pasthuk, 135
Byll, 196
Bylla, 197
Byrumbseerjella, 168


C.

Catoombura, 37
Chaab, 340
Chachoondur, also Chulde, 357
Chakoth, 347
Chakussoo, 342
Chalkurie, 348
Champa, or Chumpuk, 385
Changerie, 349
Charai, or Charwolie, 344
Cheea, or Cheetkeh, 433
Cheebook, 350
Cheedah, 426
Cheehuræ, 421
Cheel, 430
Cheenah, 427
Cheenuk, 423
Cherie, 408
Cherkund, 416
Cheetah, 429, 432
Cheetul, 428
Chehtaon, 404
Chellwuk, 376
Cherakakoli, or Chershookla, also Chermudera, 406
Cherayta, also Punsaal, 362
Chereela, 414
Chermbærie, 386
Chesteymud, Chestee, also Chitemud, 364
Chetuck, 352
Cheylchish, 377
Chichinda, also Chunchilund, 356
Chikara, 366
Chillie, 378
Chirchirra, 358
China, also Chituck, 360
Chirownjee, 361
Chirpoota, 359
Chirr, 413
Chitchera, or Chichira, also Chirchira, 351
Choekurk, 370
Chohara, 412
Choke, 396
Choocheroo, 418
Choonderdhan, or Jowdhan, also Rukitsaal, 407
Chouch, 403
Chowlai, or Chowrai, 397
Chukadana, 374
Chukeerka, 369
Chukond, 371
Chukora, 367
Chukotrah, 372
Chukua Chukui, 368
Chukunder, 365
Chumbeley, 384
Chumbuck, 389
Chumgader, 382
Chunderkanth, 390
Chundun, 392
Chundunsarba, 393
Chundurseha, 417
Chundsoor, 391
Chuttra, 354
Chuttar Phill, 355
Coochilla, 712


D.

Daad Murden, 446
Dabeh, 441
Dakh, 445
Daoodie, 440
Darhuld 438
Darma, also Soombulkhar, 444
Darmee Saar, 443
Darum, 442
Datoon, also Danth, or Danti, 439
Deodar, also Déodarie, 475
Deomun, 476
Dhadahwun, 462
Dhaie, 470
Dhak, 467
Dhamin, or Dhunoon, 460
Dhanqie, or Dhaoie 471
Dhatura, 465
Dhaw, 463
Dhawa, 464
Dhawnie, 472
Dheerukmola, 473
Dhendus, 474
Dholkudum, 468
Dhumaha, 469
Dhunia, 466
Dhunjawasa, 461
Doob, also Shittbára, 455
Doodee, 457
Doodhee, also Dukdòka, 456
Doodka, 459
Doódputeya, 458
Dooparia, 447
Dukdoka, 452
Dumna, also Dawna, 453
Dundundana, 454
Durba, 449
Durbhur, 450
Dusmool, 451
Dutchina Virna, 448


G.

Gajur, 676
Geerehti, 816
Geerguth, 726
Gehoon, 850
Geroo, 851
Ghafis, 660
Ghar, 661
Ghareekoon, 663
Ghasool, 662
Ghekwaar, or Ghwar, 827
Gheyd, 835
Ghirb, 664
Ghoghaie, 658
Ghora, 820
Gillo, 754
Godoon, 793
Goh, 801
Gokhroo, also Kunthphill, 803
Gomenduk, 788
Goobrowla, also Goobreyla, 694
Goodhul, 718
Googeerun, or Gugeeroo, 752
Googul, 809
Gooha, 811
Goolkhairoo, 756
Goolur, 812
Gooma, 789
Goondinie, 810
Goond, 768
Goondroo, or Goonderuk, 808
Goondur, 776
Goonma, 813
Goongchee, 828
Goor, 731
Goorcha, 786
Gooroochna, or Gooroochun, 785
Gota, 805
Gowrbaghan, 792
Gowrdun, also Sutpootrie, 787
Gowreh, 659
Gowrohun, 671
Gowruk, 794
Goww, 790
Gowdunta, 804
Gudjpepullie, also Gudjpeepul, 710
Gudha, 716
Gudloon, 717
Gugundool, 751
Gulbar, 755
Gumbhar, 764
Gundheel, 775
Gundhka, 783
Gundhur, 782
Gunduk, 780
Gunyar, 769
Gurehri, 723
Gyndha, 837


H.

Habooka, 1052
Haimowtie, 1051
Haloon, 1025
Harsinghar, also Hursinghar, 1024
Harun, 1031
Heeng, 1047
Heera, 1050
Heeraclokhi, 1048
Heerakussees, 1049
Hhoobaer, 1046
Hingool, 1053
Hingote, 1042
Hingpootrie, 1044
Hoolhool, 1040
Hoorhoora, 1027
Hudbjora, 1026
Huldee, also Huld, 1038
Huldia, 1039
Huldoo, 1041
Huns, 1045
Hunspeedie, 1043
Hurbarbeorhi, 1033
Hurr, 1032
Hurtaal, 1029
Hurunkherie, or Hurunkhoorie, 1028
Husthal, 1035
Husthchinkhar, 1037
Husthkool, 1034
Husthuk, 1036
Hyrbee, 1030


I.

Inderain, 74


J.

Jaal, 345
Jaie Puttrie, 341
Jaiey, 346
Jaiphill, 343
Jamalgotay, 383
Jamin, 338
Jatie, 339
Jawakhar, 402
Jawansa, 395
Jeengha, 409
Jeepaul, 431
Jeewuk, 422
Jeewung, also Buthua, 425
Jeewuntie, or Jeéwúnie, or Jéwá, 424
Jest, 363
Jhirberie, 419
Jholputtur, 405
Jhow, 415
Jill Benth, 379
Jill Butees, 380
Jill Neeb, 381
Jillpeelbuka, 375
Jojakhar, 411
Joonk, 400
Jooqunoo, 373
Juhan, 401
Juhi, 398
Jungliechuha, 388
Junkar, 410
Junth, 394
Junthmook, 387
Jutamaasie, 353
Juwar, 399
Jyaphupp, 420


K.

Kagphill, or Kagtoondie, 675
Kaiphill, or Kutphill, 677
Kakjunga, 665
Kakolie, 667
Kakra Singie, 673
Kaksaag, 668
Kalakora, 685
Kalesur, or Kulesur, 688
Kalizeerie, 679
Kalseenbie, 682
Kanakutchoo, 674
Kanch or Kaatch, 678
Kandagolhi, 690
Kangeerug, 681
Kanghi, 689
Kanjee, 670
Kans, 666
Kansi, 682
Kapithar Jug, 696
Kapoor, 691
Kapoorbile, 693
Kapoor Kutcherie, 698
Kapoorie, 699
Karela, 733
Kareyl, 721
Karunj, 722
Karownda, 720
Kasht, 680
Kasmerie, or Kasmuroo, or Kasmurga, or Kasheera, 669
Kastipadile, 687
Katchloon, 686
Kath, also Kuth, 672
Kathmanda, 684
Kawaal, 798
Kawul, 765
Kawulguth, 766
Keekur, or Babool, 848
Keera, or Kheera, 824
Keet, or Keetie, 849
Keetkarode, 847
Kela, 846
Keloondha, 760
Kenkra, 838
Keora, 843
Kesur, or Kunkum, 839
Kethki, 844
Kewanch, 845
Khaer, also Cudder, 815
Khand, 825
Khaperia, 823
Khelowrie, 829
Kherboozah, 436
Khergosh, 435
Kherie, 817
Khesoo, 833
Khewumberie, 832
Khopra, 831
Khorasanee (Adjwain), 25
Khull, 830
Khusa, also Osheére, 437
Khutchur, 434
Khutmnl, 821
Khylakhylie, 826
Khynth, 834
Kinchua, 836
Kobhee, 791
Kokla, 800
Kookra, 748
Kookrie, 749
Kooktunduk, 819
Kookurbangra, 807
Kookurchundie, 806
Kooleejan, 758
Koolunta, 759
Koonch, 796
Koonda, also Pita, 814
Koondoorie, 773
Koonj, 795
Koonja, 778
Koontukphill, also Kuntukanta, 771
Kootki, 701
Kora, 735
Korund, 730
Kowa, also Koral, 799
Kowadoorie, 802
Kowla, 767
Kowrie, 797
Krishndaan, 724
Krishn Moolie, 738
Krishn Saarba, 739
Kubab Cheenee, 697
Kudum, 715
Kujoor, 822
Kukora, 747
Kukrie, 750
Kukrownda, 753
Kukrownela, 746
Kulownjee, 761
Kulumbuk, 757
Kumbeela, 779
Kumode, or Komoodutti, 762
Kumruk, or Kumruka, 763
Kunaer or Kurneer, 777
Kundurdolie, 772
Kunghi, 784
Kungni, 774
Kunkole, 770
Kunoocha, 781
Kupass, or Kurpass, 696
Kupoor, also Khesia, 692
Kurinjua, or Korinjeka, or Kurinjee, 728
Kurkund, 734
Kurkura, 727
Kurna, 719
Kurni, 736
Kurr, 732
Kurrukphill, 737
Kurwanuk, 725
Kurwara, or Kurwala, 729
Kussees, 745
Kusseroo, or Kusseruk, 741
Kussoombh, 743
Kussowndie, or Kussownda, 740
Kustoorie, 744
Kustooryea Mirg, 742
Kutai, 704
Kutara, 702
Kutchaloo, 709
Kutcherie, 713
Kutchnar, 708
Kutchoor, 714
Kutchua, 711
Kuteera, 703
Kuth, 707
Kuthael, 700
Kutoonbur, 705
Kutputrie, 706
Kyloot, 842
Kyrnie, 818
Kyte, 840
Kytiputtrie, 841


L.

Laak, 852
Lahi, 853
Lahsun, 875
Lahusoonia, 877
Langullie, 854
Lasora, 876
Lawa, 855
Lichkutch, also Lukitch, 861
Lichmiphill, 860
Lichmuna, 859
Lobaan, 869
Lobeia, 874
Lodh, 864
Loha, 867
Lolie, 871
Lomrie, 872
Long, 868
Longmushk, 873
Loni, 870
Loodh'phup, 863
Loonia, 866
Lubhera, 855
Lublie, or Lolie, 856
Lukmunia, and Lukmunie, 862
Lutoobrie, also Soonitjhal, 857
Lydoaloo, 858


M.

Maachik, 884
Maad, 882
Maak, also Maash, 881
Maankund, 886
Maashpurnie, also Makonie, 890
Maat, 889
Madhooie, 879
Mahameed, 961
Maha Moondie, 953
Mahaneem, 957
Mahasutawurie, 959
Mahawunth, 960
Mahawur, 962
Mahesingie, 888
Mahkee, 955
Mahwa, 954
Maien, 883
Majoophill, or Maijphill, 885
Malknagnie, 878
Malook, 887
Maoarowbnee, 880
Mayoorabuka, 965
Mayursuka, 964
Meed, 971
Meetanioboo, 972
Mendha, 966
Mendi, 958
Mendi Auwul, 963
Merch, 909
Merchai, 910
Merg, 906
Mernal, 912
Methie, 968
Missie, also Kakjunga, 914
Mogra, 951
Mohoka, 956
Mohuk, 936
Mokhun, 937
Moocherae, 935
Moodukpurnie, 901
Moogta Sukut, 921
Moogtaphill, 927
Moojkuod, 896
Mookul, 944
Moolie, or Moolug, 945
Moom, 943
Moondie, 927
Moondookpurnie, 930
Moong, 938
Moonga, 947
Moonjee, 933
Moora, 905
Moorhurrie, 904
Moorhuttee, 908
Moorsheka, 950
Mooser, 934
Mooslee, or Mooslicund, 949
Moot, 932
Morba, 941
More, 940
Moth, 939
Motha, 942
Motie, 946
Mowlserie, 899
Muchechi, 898
Mucheli, 893
Mudden, 894
Muddenphill, 948
Mudh, 900
Mudhkurkuttie, 903
Mudhoolka, 902
Mudhraa, 897
Mug Peepul, 920
Muggur, 918
Mujeeth, 895
Mukbara, also Mukhana, 923
Muko, 919
Mukoond, 917
Mullagheer, 924
Mulleen, 926
Mulleka, 925
Mundar, 931
Munn, 928
Munmal, 929
Murdok, 979
Murorphillie, 913
Mursa, 911
Murua, 907
Musakunie, 952
Musoor, 915
Mustchagundka, 916
Muttreegurba, 892
Muttur 891
Mydhasingie, 969
Mynphill, 967
Myoorjung, 970


N.

Naaoe, 983
Nadey, 980
Nagermotha, 981
Nagbulla, 982
Nagdown, 977
Nagdumnie, 978
Nagesur, 976
Nainjooth, 1018
Nalee, or Narie, 973
Naringee, 975
Naryit, 974
Neeb, 1015
Neel, 1013
Neela Sindhuk, 1010
Neela Totha, 1005
Neelgau, 1017
Neelasabood, 1014
Neelkant, 1008
Neelkunti, 1019
Neelobe, 1016
Neenboo, 1013
Neendie, 1009
Neenuk, 1006
Neeturbala, 1004
Nekund Baaperi, 998
Nemuk Chitchera, 993
Nemuk Kutchloon, 995
Nemuk Soendha, 997
Nemuk Soonchur, also Nemuk Sia, 994
Nemuk Udhbidh, 996
Nergoondie, 986
Nerkutchoor, 985
Newarrie, 1001
Newla, 1007
Neyrmellie, 987
Nirbissie, 984
Niswut, 988
Nowllee, 1003
Nowsader, 1002
Nuk, 989
Nukchecknie, 990
Null, or Nullie, 992
Nullwa, 991
Nunahuld, also Mamerran 1000
Nundbyrchun, or Nundbyrkha, 999
Nypaul, also Nupaul Neib, 1011


P.

Paá, 92
Paadae, 101
Paan, 110
Padill, also Patill, 91
Paethaon, also Culsi or Breshtpirnie, 128
Pakur, also Pakull, 99
Palass, also Pullae, 190
Palass Peepul, 192
Palewut, also Palook, 96
Palug, 109
Panee Amluk, 100
Papeitha, 125
Paperie, 103
Papeyha, 127
Papieha, 123
Papotun, 124
Para, or Parud, 112
Parha, 106
Pariss Peepol, also Palass Peepul, 111
Parjath, or Parbhudder, 119
Passownie, 278
Patera, also Patèla, 130
Patirr, 118
Patole, 129
Patung, 131
Pechuck, 265
Pedloon, also Kutchloon, 156
Peease, 274
Peeche, 280
Peeloo, 272
Peeplamool, 275
Peepul, 269
Peertuckhpirnie, 169
Peeta, also Khunda, 277
Peetul, 268
Pendaloo, 205
Peoke, or Peossie, 273
Pereshtpurnie, 161
Peroza, or Berektummun, 176
Phaar, 251
Phaloke, 260
Phalisae, or Phálsa, 229
Phankra, 253
Phirrhud, 231
Phitkerrie, 255
Phoje, 234
Phooth, 263
Phunjeetuck, 240
Pindaluck, or Pindal, 206
Pindkhajoor, 208
Pindole, 204
Pithpapra, 133
Pockurmool, 235
Podeena, 228
Podhka, or Boleserie, 222
Poiey, 221
Ponauk, 201
Ponda, 226
Poondereek, 211
Potie, 224
Potuck, 225
Pudumcharnie, 154
Pudmeinie, 153
Pudumrauj, 155
Pulwull, 193
Punchcheer, 213
Punealae, 220
Pungekool, 214
Punjemool, 215
Punk, 202
Punna, 209
Punnus, 219
Puns, 218
Purbal, 167
Purpeeloo, 159
Purundha, 172
Pursarnie, 173
Pushanbedh, 187
Putalphoorie, 140
Putrudj, 132
Puturjenie, 141
Pynvar, or Toeroota, 200
Pystha, 178
Pysturling, 139
Pytha, 179


R.

Raab, 477
Raal, 483
Raang, 482
Rahusphill, 515
Rai, 482
Raibele, 486
Raidooree, 488
Rajehuns, 481
Rajejakha, 480
Rajeneemboophile, 485
Raje Umber, 478
Raje Ummur, 489
Ramputtrie, 484
Rashna, 487
Rasie, 490
Rassun. Also Raisun, or Rowasun, 479
Rattaloo, also Runtaloo, 492
Rawasun, 507
Recktaal, or Rukitkund, 601
Reech, 517
Reenga, 518
Reetha, 519
Reewudj, 516
Rekhbuk, Rekhbukh, or Rekhba, 500
Rewind, 520
Roheera, 514
Rohni, 513
Rohoo, 508
Romus, or Mudwal, 512
Roohus, 509
Roodraz, 495
Roodwunti, 495
Rooi, 511
Roopa, also Roopuk, 510
Ruckitchunden, 502
Rudd, 494
Rukitphoop, 504
Rukitsal, 503
Rungni, 505
Rungtirra, also Sungtirra, 506
Russ, 497
Russ Kapoor, 499
Rusunjeen, 498
Ruswut, 496
Ruttun, 493
Ruttunjooth, also Abookhoolsa, 491


S.

Saaje, 534
Saal, 542
Saale, 536
Saalie, 532
Saalpernie, or Saloom, 531
Saaltie, also Kapoor Kutcherie, 533
Saamp, 541
Saarba, 527
Sabur, 539
Saeb, 634
Sagown, or Saag, 530
Sahidei, 619
Sahunserbede, 617
Salamookh, 537
Saluk, or Salook, 529
Sanbir, 526
Saramill, Sarumluk, or Saral, 528
Sarass, 540
Saro, 538
Satoon, 543
Sawang, 535
Sealie, 628
Sebaloo, Sebalie, or Nindee, 589
Sedarth, 554
Seelidj, 632
Seenaki, 629
Seenku, 630
Seep, or Seepie, 633
Seetaphill, 635
Segund Philla, 575
Sehoond, 623
Semb, also Séme, 622
Sembill, 621
Sendhæ, 627
Sendhi, 626
Seotie, 631
Sericbans, 563
Seriepurnie, also Gumbar, 570
Seriss, also Sereeka, 564
Serje, 560
Seroopbudder, 571
Seroopjeea, 569
Setawur, also Setawurie, or Shetawur, 549
Setoopula, 548
Shaldan, 637
Shalook, 638
Sheesha, 654
Sheeshum, also Seeshum, 655
Sheeta, 653
Shehut, 652
Sheobogun, 656
Shereefa, also Seetaphill, 642
Shetoot, 651
Shitawuballie, 641
Sholie, 649
Shora, 650
Shubbe, 639
Shuftaloo, 643
Shukur Javan, 644
Shukur Kund, 645
Shumie, also Seenkur, 646
Shungirf, also Ingoor, 648
Shunphopee, 647
Shutawur, 640
Sial, 625
Sillajeet, also Silladeet, 577
Sillaruss, 578
Sindoor, 590
Sindoorie, 585
Singhara, 584
Singia, or Singia Jur, also Singia Khar, or Beechnak, 636
Sip Kullie, 544
Sirool, 565
Sirpund, 562
Sirsom, or Seerkup, 566
Sirunmaki, 568
Sisoo, or Sishum, 624
Sohaga, 620
Sohora, 616
Sohunjena, or Suhinjena, or Sajena, or Sekir, 618
Somooder Lone, 581
Somooder Phane, 580
Somooderphill, 579
Somoodersake, 582
Somph, 605
Sona, 604
Sonamukie, 597
Sonth, 606
Soocherakhar, 553
Sooderie, 610
Sooe Junglie, 612
Soogunass, 576
Soomboolkhar, 591
Soombullie, 599
Soonchur, 608
Soonkullie, 613
Soopearee, 545
Soopee, 603
Soorinjoothka, 596
Soorjemooki, 609
Sooroon, 598
Soorudijhall, 615
Soorunkitki, 567
Sooryalee, 561
Soos, 600
Soubustanee, 611
Sowa, 607
Sowall, 614
Subskun, 546
Sud Sohaung, 555
Suda Khar, 556
Sudagolab, 558
Sudaphill, or Sudeephill, 557
Suer, 601
Suffrie Ambr, 574
Sungjerahut, also Sungderaz, 594
Sungjoothka, 595
Sungkaholie, 586
Sungtirra, 583
Sunkh, 588
Sunkhal, 593
Sunkia, 592
Sunn, 587
Surphoka, also Soojer, 559
Surwalla, 572
Sussa, 573
Sutarie, 547
Suteepulas, 552
Sutputtrie, 550
Sutsar, 551
Suwa, 602


T.

Taal, or Taar, 283
Taalesputter, 284
Taberuck, 286
Takkur, 305
Talmukara, or Talmukana, 282
Tamaal, 312
Tamaalputtur, 314
Tanbirr, 285
Tarkoota, or Terookhun, 294
Tatyrie, 289
Tawakeer, 320
Tedhara, 292
Teerun, 335
Teetee, 337
Teetur, 330
Telk, 308
Telkirur, or Telkúr, 332
Teluck, 307
Tendhoo, also Tendook, 328
Tendooa, 331
Teraemanna, also Teraman, 229
Terbile, 336
Teriagundh, of Tirjatuck, 295
Teroor, also great Dathun, 300
Tersindiaturnie, 298
Tesoo, 333
Tezpat, 334
Thour, 327
Till, or Tillee, 309
Tirdisha, 302
Tirmirra, 297
Tirnie, 301
Tirpurnie, 304
Tirtuck, 296
Tittereck, also Tintereek, 290
Tombrir, also Tombie, 321
Toodun, 325
Tooiekam, 324
Toolsi, 310
Toon, 315, 316
Toor, 31
Toott, 326
Toour, 323
Tubasheer, or Tubakeer, 287
Tudje, also Keelkheela, 291
Tuggur, 306
Tomakoo, 311
Tumbole, 318
Tunkaar, 319
Tuntureek, also Seemák, 317
Tuputtee, or Typsie, 288
Turai, 322
Turkool, 293
Tym, 313
Tyrphilla, 303


V.

Vaasun, also Bootee Shaikh Fureed, 1020
Vcherkhar, 1021
Veedoorie, also Bedoorie, 1022
Veroojun, also Beroojun, 1023


Z.

Zachmeheath, 523
Zeera, 521
Zeerki, 522
Zerki, also Kála Dana, 524
Zumiekund, 525







APPENDIX.

                                    Page.

    Burning of hands and feet,       177
    Parts of human body,             178
    Tastes,                         ibid.
    Secretions or humours,          ibid.
    Degrees,                         179
    Weights,                        ibid.
    Abbreviations,                  ibid.



N. B. A few articles contained in the original work, viz. Medicines
principally used in sorcery and incantation, have been omitted with
the Translator's permission. This renders the succession of Nos. of the
articles irregular,--for instance, No. 72 follows next after No. 70.

W. T.








NOTE


[1] Often tried with effect.






End of Project Gutenberg's The Taleef Shereef, by Muhammad Sharif Khan

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TALEEF SHEREEF ***

***** This file should be named 53755-8.txt or 53755-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/5/3/7/5/53755/

Produced by Jeroen Hellingman and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net/ for Project
Gutenberg (This book was produced from scanned images of
public domain material from the Google Books project.)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

